But all all I know is that it seems like every time I am up here after a meeting , and I start it , it works fine . And if I 'm up here and I start it and we 're all sitting here waiting to have a meeting , it gives me that error message and I have not yet sat down with been able to get that error message in a point where I can sit down and find out where it 's occurring in the code . professor d: So  so the  , the new procedural change that just got suggested , which I think is a good idea is that  , we do the digit recordings at the end . And that way , if we 're recording somebody else 's  meeting , and a number of the participants have to run off to some other meeting and don't have the time , then they can run off . It 'll mean we 'll get somewhat fewer  , sets of digits , but  , I think that way we 'll cut into people 's time , if someone 's on strict time  , less .  , so , let 's see , we were having a discussion the other day , maybe we should bring that up , about  , the nature of the data that we are collecting .  @ @ that  , we should have a fair amount of data that is  , collected for the same meeting , so that we can ,  I don't know . Wh - what what were some of the points again about that ? Is it phd f: well , OK , I 'll back up . phd f: at the previous at last week 's meeting , this meeting I was griping about wanting to get more data and I I talked about this with Jane and Adam , and was thinking of this mostly just so that we could do research on this data  , since we 'll have a new this new student di does wanna work with us , phd a: Well , great . phd f: And he 's already funded part - time , so we 'll only be paying him for sort of for half of the normal part - time , phd a: What a deal . grad b: And what 's he interested in , specifically ? phd f: So he 's comes from a signal - processing background , but I liked him a lot cuz he 's very interested in higher level things , like language , and disfluencies and all kinds of eb maybe prosody , grad b:   Anyway , I thought OK , maybe we should have enough data so that if he starts he 'd be starting in January , next semester that we 'd have , you know , enough data to work with . phd f: But , Jane and Adam brought up a lot of good points that just posting a note to Berkeley people to have them come down here has some problems in that you m you need to make sure that the speakers are who you want and that the meeting type is what you want , and so forth . So , I thought about that and I think it 's still possible , but I 'd rather try to get more regular meetings of types that we know about , and hear , then sort of a mish - mosh of a bunch of one one - time grad b: One offs ? phd f: Yeah , just because it would be very hard to process the data in all senses , both to get the ,  to figure out what type of meeting it is and to do any kind of higher level work on it , like well , I was talking to Morgan about things like summarization , or what 's this meeting about .  it 's very different if you have a group that 's just giving a report on what they did that week , versus coming to a decision and so forth . Then I was  , talking to Morgan about some new proposed work in this area , sort of a separate issue from what the student would be working on where I was thinking of doing some kind of summarization of meetings or trying to find cues in both the utterances and in the utterance patterns , like in numbers of overlaps and amount of speech , sort of raw cues from the interaction that can be measured from the signals and from the diff different microphones that point to sort of hot spots in the meeting , or things where stuff is going on that might be important for someone who didn't attend to listen to . And in that  , regard , I thought we definitely w will need it 'd b it 'd be nice for us to have a bunch of data from a few different domains , or a few different kinds of meetings . So this this meeting is one of them , although I 'm not sure I can participate if I You know , I would feel very strange being part of a meeting that you were then analysing later for things like summarization . phd f: and then there are some others that menti that Morgan mentioned , like the front - end meeting and maybe a networking group meeting . phd f: But basically , for anything where you 're trying to get a summarization of some kind of meeting meaning out of the meeting , it would be too hard to have fifty different kinds of meetings where we didn't really have a good grasp on what does it mean to summarize , grad b: Yeah . phd f: but rather we should have different meetings by the same group but hopefully that have different summaries . And then we need a couple that of We don't wanna just have one group because that might be specific to that particular group , but @ @ three or four different kinds . So , in general , I was thinking more data but also data where we hold some parameters constant or fairly similar , grad b:   phd f: like a meeting about of people doing a certain kind of work where at least half the participants each time are the same . grad b:  professor d: Now , let l l let me just give you the other side to that cuz I ca because I I don't disagree with that , but I think there is a complimentary piece to it too . professor d: As many people here a a and talking about the kind of thing that you were just talking about it would have  too few people from my point of view . So ,  I think I would also very much like us to have a fair amount of really random scattered meetings , of somebody coming down from campus , and and  , phd c:   professor d: sure , if we can get more from them , fine , postdoc e:   professor d: but if we only get one or two from each group , that still could be useful acoustically just because we 'd have close and distant microphones with different people . postdoc e: Can I can I say about that that the the issues that I think Adam and I raised were more a matter of advertising so that you get more native speakers . Because I think if you just say an And in particular , my suggestion was to advertise to linguistics grad students because there you 'd have so people who 'd have proficiency enough in English that that  , it would be useful for for purposes You know . postdoc e: But you know , I think I 've been I 've I I 've gathered data from undergrads at on campus and if you just post randomly to undergrads I think you 'd get such a mixed bag that it would be hard to know how much conversation you 'd have at all . And and the English you 'd have The language models would be really hard to build professor d: Well , you want to i postdoc e: because it would not really be it would be an interlanguage rather than than a professor d: Well , OK , first place , I I I don't think we 'd just want to have random people come down and talk to one another , I think there should be a meeting that has some goal and point cuz I I think that 's what we 're investigating , postdoc e: OK . phd f: It has to be a a pre - existing meeting , like a meeting that would otherwise happen anyway . professor d: So I was I was thinking more in terms of talking to professors  , and and and  , senior  , d and  , doctoral students who are leading projects and offering to them that they have their hold their meeting down here . The second point is  I think that for some time now , going back through BeRP I think that we have had speakers that we 've worked with who had non - native accents and I th I think that postdoc e: Oh , oh . postdoc e: No , it 's more a matter of  , proficiency , e e just simply fluency . postdoc e: I deal with people on on campus who I think sometimes people , undergraduates  in computer science  , have language skills that make , you know that their their fluency and writing skills are not so strong . professor d: You 're just talking about postdoc e: Well , e I just think , grad b: We all had the same thought . postdoc e: but you know , it 's like when you get into the graduate level , no problem . professor d: But grad b: Well , I think that ,  I think that the only thing we should say in the advertisement is that the meeting should be held in English . And and I think if it 's a pre - existing meeting and it 's held in English , I I think it 's probably OK if a few of the people don't have  , g particularly good English skills . postdoc e: OK , now can I can I say the other aspect of this from my perspective which is that  , there 's there 's this this issue , you have a corpus out there , it should be used for for multiple things cuz it 's so expensive to put together . postdoc e: And if people want to approach  , i so I know e e You know this The idea of computational linguistics and probabilistic grammars and all may not be the focus of this group , professor d:  - huh . postdoc e: but the idea of language models , which are fund you know generally speaking  , you know , t t terms of like the amount of benefit per dollar spent or an hour invested in preparing the data , professor d:   postdoc e: if you have a choice between people who are pr more proficient in  , i more fluent , more more close to being academic English , then it would seem to me to be a good thing . I postdoc e: Because otherwise y you don't have the ability to have  , so if if you have a bunch of idiolects that 's the worst possible case . If you have people who are using English as a as an interlanguage because they they don't  , they can't speak in their native languages and but their interlanguage isn't really a match to any existing , language model , professor d:  - huh . professor d: Well , that 's pretty much what you 're going to have in the networking group . But the thing is , I think that these people are of high enough level in their in their language proficiency that professor d: I see . postdoc e: I I 'm I 'm just thinking that we have to think at a at a higher level view , could we have a language model , a a grammar a grammar , basically , that  , wo would be a a possibility . postdoc e: So y so if you wanted to bring in a model like Dan Jurafsky 's model , an and do some top - down stuff , it to help th the bottom - up and merge the things or whatever , it seems like  , I don't see that there 's an argument professor d:   postdoc e: I 'm I what I think is that why not have the corpus , since it 's so expensive to put together , useful for the widest range of of central corp things that people generally use corpora for and which are , you know , used in computational linguistics . professor d: OK , well , i i let 's let 's see what we can get .  , it it I think that if we 're aiming at at  , groups of graduate students and professors and so forth who are talking about things together , and it 's from the Berkeley campus , probably most of it will be OK , postdoc e: Yes , that 's fine . And my point in m in my note to Liz was I think that undergrads are an iff iffy population . grad b: Well , not to mention the fact that I would be hesitant certainly to take anyone under eighteen , probably even an anyone under twenty - one . professor d: Oh , you age - ist ! grad b: What 's that ? Well , age - ist . Well , Morgan , you were mentioning that Mari may not use the k equipment from IBM if they found something else , cuz there 's a professor d: They 're they 're yeah , they 're d they 're  assessing whether they should do that or y do something else , hopefully over the next few weeks . phd f: Cuz  , one remote possibility is that if we st if we inherited that equipment , if she weren't using it , could we set up a room in the linguistics department ? And and  , there there may be a lot more or or in psych , or in comp wherever , in another building where we could  , record people there . I think we 'd have a better chance grad b: I think we 'd need a real motivated partner to do that . But if there were such a  it 's a remote possibility , then  , you know , one of us could you know , go up there and record the meeting or something rather than bring all of them down here . phd f: So it 's just a just a thought if they end up not using the the hardware . professor d: Well , the other thing Yeah ,  the other thing that I was hoping to do in the first place was to turn it into some kind of portable thing so you could wheel it around .  , and grad b: Well , I know that space is really scarce on at least in CS . phd f: But you may not need a separate room , you know , grad b: That 's true . phd f: the idea is , if they have a meeting room and they can guarantee that the equipment will be safe and so forth , and if one of us is up there once a week to record the meeting or something grad b: True . professor d: Well , maybe John would let us put it into the phonology lab or something . grad b: Yeah , I think it would be interesting because then we could regularly get another meeting . phd c: But I I I think you need , another portable thing a another portable equipment to to do , eh , more e easier the recording process , eh , out from ICSI . phd c: Eh , if you you want to to record , eh , a seminar or a class , eh , in the university , you you need It - it would be eh eh very difficult to to put , eh , a lot of , eh , head phones eh in different people when you have to to record only with , eh , this kind of , eh , d device . grad b: Yeah , but I think if we if we wanna just record with the tabletop microphones , that 's easy . grad b: Right ? That 's very easy , phd c: Ye - Yeah , yeah . professor d: Actually , that 's a int that raises an interesting point that came up in our discussion that 's maybe worth repeating . We realized that , when we were talking about this that , OK , there 's these different things that we want to do with it . So , it 's true that we wanna be selective in some ways , the way that you were speaking about with , not having an interlingua and  , these other issues . But on the other hand , it 's not necessarily true that we need all of the corpus to satisfy all of it . So , a a as per the example that we wanna have a fair amount that 's done with a small n recorded with a small , typ number of types of meetings But we can also have another part that 's , just one or two meetings of each of a of a range of them and that 's OK too .  , i We realized in discussion that the other thing is , what about this business of distant and close microphones ?  , we really wanna have a substantial amount recorded this way , that 's why we did it . But what about For th for these issues of summarization , a lot of these higher level things you don't really need the distant microphone . phd f: Right , I c I think there 's grad b: And you don't really need the close microphone , you mean . phd f: Yea - yeah yeah , you actually don't really even need any fancy microphone . postdoc e: Which one did you mean ? professor d: You d You don't ne it doesn't you just need some microphone , somewhere . professor d: but  phd f: use  , but I think that any data that we spend a lot of effort to collect , professor d: Yeah . phd f: you know , each person who 's interested in  , we have a cou we have a bunch of different , slants and perspectives on what it 's useful for , they need to be taking charge of making sure they 're getting enough of the kind of data that they want . phd f: And So in my case , I think there w there is enough data for some kinds of projects and not enough for others . phd f: And so I 'm looking and thinking , " Well I 'd be glad to walk over and record people and so forth if it 's to help th in my interest . phd f: And other people need to do that for themselves , h or at least discuss it so that we can find some optimal professor d: Right . professor d: But I think that I 'm raising that cuz I think it 's relevant exactly for this idea up there that if you think about , " Well , gee , we have this really complicated setup to do , " well maybe you don't . professor d: Maybe if if If really all you want is to have a a a recording that 's good enough to get a  , a transcription from later , you just need to grab a tape recorder and go up and make a recording . professor d: we we could have a fairly We could just get a DAT machine and phd f: Well , I agree with Jane , though , on the other hand that phd c: Yeah . phd f: So that might be true , you may say for instance , summarization , or something that sounds very language oriented . You may say well , " Oh yeah , you just do that from transcripts of a radio show . phd f: But what you what I was thinking is long term what would be neat is to be able to pick up on  Suppose you just had a distant microphone there and you really wanted to be able to determine this . phd f: So I do think that long term you should always try to satisfy the greatest number of of interests and have this parallel information , which is really what makes this corpus powerful . phd f: Otherwise , you know , lots of other sites can propose individual studies , so professor d:  but I I think that the  i We can't really underestimate the difficulty shouldn't really u underestimate the difficulty of getting a setup like this up . professor d: And so ,  it took quite a while to get that together and to say , " Oh , we 'll just do it up there , " phd f: OK . professor d: If you 're talking about something simple , where you throw away a lot of these dimensions , then you can do that right away . Talking about something that has all of these different facets that we have here , it won't happen quickly , it won't be easy , and there 's all sorts of issues about th you know keeping the equipment safe , or else hauling it around , and all sorts of o phd f: So then maybe we should try to bring people here . professor d: I think the first priority should be to pry to get try to get people to come here . phd f: that 's that 's OK , so professor d: We 're set up for it . phd f: Yeah , I And I think we can get people to come here , that But the issue is you definitely wanna make sure that the kind of group you 're getting is the right group so that you don't waste a lot of your time and the overhead in bringing people down . professor d: Yeah , they have to do their digits or they don't get they don't get their food . professor d: Yeah grad b: Should I pursue that ? phd f: Oh , definitely , yeah . grad b: So I 'm not sure whether they 'll still be so willing to volunteer , but I 'll send an email and ask . phd f: I 'd love to get people that are not linguists or engineers , cuz these are both weird grad b: Right . professor d: The the The oth the other h phd f: well , I know , I shouldn't say that . The o the o the other The other thing is , that we we talked about is give to them  , burn an extra CD - ROM . professor d: and give them So if they want a basically and audio record of their phd f: Well , I thought that was I thought he meant , " Give them a music CD , " like they g Then he said a CD of the of their speech professor d: Oh . phd f: and I guess it depends of what kind of audience you 're talking to , but You know , I personally would not want a CD of my meeting , grad b: Mmm . Of the meeting ? phd f: but maybe yeah , maybe you 're professor d: If you 're having some planning meeting of some sort and  you 'd like phd f: right . professor d: We 're saying , " Look , you know , you 're gonna get this . It 's actually p It 's probably gonna be pretty useless to you , grad b: Yep . professor d: but you 'll ge appreciate , you know , where it 's useful and where it 's useless , phd f: Right . professor d: and then , we 're gonna move this technology , so it 'll become useful . phd a: What if you could tell them that you 'll give them the the transcripts when they come back ? postdoc e: Alth phd f: But we might need a little more to incentivize them , that 's all . postdoc e: I hav I have to  raise a little eensy - weensy concern about doing th giving them the CD immediately , because of these issues of , you know , this kind of stuff , where maybe You know ? professor d: Good point . professor d: So we can so we can postdoc e: We could burn it after it 's been cleared with the transcript stage . phd f: If It should be the same CD - ROM that we distribute publically , grad b: That 's a good point . phd f: right ? professor d: Although it 's phd f: Otherwise they 're not allowed to play it for anyone . postdoc e: Yeah , that 's right , say " Yeah , well , I got this CD , and , Your Honor , I " grad b: Yeah . So that was that topic , and then  , I guess another topic would be where are we in the whole disk resources question for grad b: We are slowly slowly getting to the point where we have  enough sp room to record meetings . So I  did a bunch of archiving , and still doing a bunch of archiving , I I 'm in the midst of doing the P - files from  , Broadcast News . phd c: Eleven ? grad b: And it 'll take another eleven to do the clone . phd a: Where did you copy it to ? grad b: Well , it 's Abbott . professor d: Sk - It 's copying from one place on Abbott to another place on Abbott ? grad b: Tape . phd a: Ah ! grad b: So I 'm archiving it , and then I 'm gonna delete the files . postdoc e: One thing The good news about that that is that once once it 's archived , it 's pretty quick to get back . professor d: Is it ? postdoc e: it it it The other direction is fast , but this direction is really slow . phd a: Generating a clone ? postdoc e: Yeah , that 's a good point . phd a: Oh ! Hunh ! professor d: S postdoc e: Now , what will  Is the plan to g to So stuff will be saved , it 's just that you 're relocating it ?  , so we 're gonna get more disk space ? Or did I ? grad b: No , the the these are the P - files from Broadcast News , which are regeneratable regeneratable postdoc e: OK . grad b: And so they they were two gigabytes per file and we had six of them or something . professor d: Or maybe six ? grad b: The SUN , ha  , takes more disks than the Andatico one did . The SUN rack takes Th - One took four and one took six , or maybe it was eight and twelve . professor d: How many How much phd a: Is there a difference in price or something ? grad b: Well , what happened is that we we bought all our racks and disks from Andatico for years , according to Dave , and Andatico got bought by another company and doubled their prices . I 've been looking at the , Aurora data and , first first look at it , there were basically three directories on there that could be moved . One was called Aurora , one was Spanish , which was Carmen 's Spanish stuff , and the other one was , SPINE . phd a: And so , I wrote to Dan and he was very concerned that the SPINE stuff was moving to a non - backed - up disk . So , I realized that well , probably not all of that should be moved , just the CD - ROM type data , the the static data . So I moved that , and then  , I asked him to check out and see if it was OK . I told him he could delete it if he wanted to , I haven't checked today to see if he 's deleted it or not . And then Carmen 's stuff , I realized that when I had copied all of her stuff to XA , I had copied stuff there that was dynamic data . professor d: So , but ,  y you 're figuring you can record another five meetings or something with the space that you 're clearing up from the Broadcast News , but , we have some other disks , some of which you 're using for Aurora , but are we g do we have some other other space now ? grad b: Yep . So , so , we have space on the current disk right now , where Meeting Recorder is , and that 's probably enough for about four meetings . phd a: OK , I but the stuff I 'm moving from Aurora is on the DC disk that we grad b: I don't remember . Yeah ,  we were at a hundred percent and then we dropped down to eighty - six for reasons I don't understand . And then with Broadcast News , that 's five or six more meetings , so , you know , we have a couple weeks .  , so , yeah , I think I think we 're OK , until we get the new disk . phd a: So should ,  One question I had for you was , we need we sh probably should move the Aurora an and all that other stuff off of the Meeting Recorder disk . Is there another backed - up disk that you know of that would ? grad b: We should put it onto the Broadcast News one . grad b: But , so we could ' jus just do that at the end of today , once the archive is complete , and I 've verified it . professor d: OK , @ @ So , then I guess th the last thing I 'd had on my my agenda was just to hear hear an update on what what Jose has been doing , phd c:  - huh . professor d: so phd c: I have , eh , The result of my work during the last days . Eh , and the the last , eh , days , eh , I work , eh , in my house , eh , in a lot of ways and thinking , reading eh , different things about the the Meeting Recording project . phd c: But for me , eh is interesting because , eh , eh , here 's i is the demonstration of the overlap , eh , problem . phd c: It 's a real problem , a frequently problem  , because you have overlapping zones eh , eh , eh , all the time . phd c: Eh , by a moment I have , eh , nnn , the , eh , n I I did a mark of all the overlapped zones in the meeting recording , with eh , a exact mark . Oh , you did that by hand ? phd c: Heh ? That 's eh , yet b b Yeah , by b b by hand by hand because , eh , eh " Why . " grad b: Can I see that ? Can I get a copy ? professor d: Oh . phd c: My my idea is to work phd a: Wow ! phd c: I I I do I don I don't @ @ I don't know , eh , if , eh , it will be possible because I I I haven't a lot eh , enough time to to to work .  , only just eh , six months , as you know , but , eh , my idea is , eh , is very interesting to to work in in the line of , eh , automatic segmenter . phd c: Eh but eh , eh , in my opinion , we need eh , eh , a reference eh session to t to to evaluate the the the tool . And so are you planning to do that or have you done that already ? phd c: And No , no , with i grad b: Have you done that or are you planning to do that ? phd c: Sorry ? No , I I plan to do that . Darn ! phd c: I plan I plan , but eh , eh , the idea is the is the following . I I will I will eh , talk about eh , in the in the blackboard about the my ideas . phd c: Eh , eh This information eh , with eh , exactly time marks eh , for the overlapping zones eh overlapping zone , and eh , a speaker a a pure speech eh , eh , speaker zone .  , eh zones eh of eh speech of eh , one speaker without any any eh , noise eh , any any acoustic event eh that eh , eh , w eh , is not eh , speech , real speech . And , I need t true eh , silence for that , because my my idea is to to study the nnn the the set of parameters eh , what , eh , are more m more discriminant to eh , classify . The idea is to eh to use eh , I 'm not sure to eh yet , but eh my idea is to use a a cluster eh algorithm or , nnn , a person strong in neural net algorithm to eh to eh study what is the , eh , the property of the different feat eh feature , eh , to classify eh speech and overlapping eh speech . phd c: And my idea is eh , it would be interesting to to have eh , a control set . And my control set eh , will be the eh , silence , silence without eh , any any noise . postdoc e: Which means that we 'd still You 'd hear the grad b: Yeah , fans . phd c: Eh , I  eh , noise eh , eh claps eh , tape clips , eh , the difference eh , professor d:   phd c: eh , eh , event eh , which , eh , eh , has , eh eh , a hard effect of distorti spectral distortion in the in the eh speech . grad b: So so you intend to hand - mark those and exclude them ? professor d:   phd c: Yeah , I have mark in in in in that Not in all in all the the file , grad b:   phd c: only eh , eh , nnn , mmm , I have eh , ehm I don't remind what is the the the the quantity , but eh , I I have marked enough speech on over and all the overlapping zones . I have , eh , two hundred and thirty , more or less , overlapping zones , and is similar to to this information , grad b: Whew !   phd c: because with the program , I cross the information of  , of Jane with eh , my my segmentation by hand . phd c: And the the idea is , eh , I I will use , eh , I want My idea is , eh , to eh to classify . phd c: I I need eh , the exact eh , mark of the different , eh , eh , zones because I I want to put , eh , for eh , each frame a label indicating . I I I put , eh , eh , for each frame a label indicating what is th the type , what is the class , eh , which it belong . phd c: Eh , the class you will overlapping speech " overlapping " is a class , eh , " speech " @ @ the class that 's grad b: Nonspeech . phd a: These will be assigned by hand ? phd c: a I I I ha I h I I put the mark by hand , phd a: Based on the  - huh . phd c: because , eh , my idea is , eh , in in the first session , I need , eh , I I need , eh , to be sure that the information eh , that , eh , I I will cluster , is is right . Because , eh , eh , if not , eh , I will I will , eh , return to the speech file to analyze eh , what is the problems , grad b: Well , training , and validation . And I I 'd prefer I would prefer , the to to have , eh , this labeled automatically , but , eh , eh , fro th I need truth . So , the difference between the top two , i So so I start at the bottom , so " silence " is clear . By " speech " do you mean speech by one sp by one person only ? phd c: Speech Yeah . postdoc e: So this is un OK , and then and then the top includes people speaking at the same time , or or a speaker and a breath overlapping , someone else 's breath , or or clicking , overlapping with speech So , that that 's all those possibilities in the top one . phd c: Eh , in the first moment , because , eh , eh , I I have information , eh , of the overlapping zones , eh , information about if the , eh , overlapping zone is , eh , from a speech , clear speech , from a one to a two eh speaker , or three speaker , or is is the zone where the breath of a speaker eh , overlaps eh , onto eh , a speech , another , especially speech . postdoc e: So it 's basi it 's basically speech wi som with with something overlapping , which could be speech but doesn't need to be . phd c: No , no , es especially eh , overlapping speech from , eh , different eh , eh , speaker . Eh professor d: No , but there 's but , I think she 's saying " Where do you In these three categories , where do you put the instances in which there is one person speaking and other sounds which are not speech ? " phd c: Ah ! professor d: Which category do you put that in ? postdoc e: Yeah , that 's right . Yeah , he here I I put eh speech from eh , from , eh , one speaker without , eh , eh , any any any events more . postdoc e: Oh ! professor d: Right , so where do you put speech from one speaker that does have a nonspeech event at the same time ? phd c: Where ? Where What is the class ? professor d: Which catege which category ? postdoc e: Like a c phd c: No . phd c: For for the by the @ @ no , @ @ because I I I I want to limit the the nnn , the the study . grad b: Yeah , so that 's what he was saying before , is that he excluded those . phd c: " Why ? Why ? What 's the reason ? " because i it 's the first study . In the in the future , the the idea is to to extend the class , phd a: Is is phd c: to consider all the all the information , you you mentioned before professor d: Yeah . phd c: but eh , the the first idea Because eh , I don't know what hap what will happen with the study . i it 's pure phd a: What if there was a door - slam or something ? phd c: No , no , it 's pure silence . professor d: What you Well w I I think what you m I think what you mean is that it 's nonspeech segments that don't have impulsive noises . professor d: Right ? Cuz you 're calling what you 're calling " event " is somebody coughing or clicking , or rustling paper , or hitting something , which are impulsive noises . Right ? phd c: h here yet , yet I I I I I think I I think , eh , there are that some kind of noises that , eh , don't don't wanted to to be in that , eh , in that control set . phd c: But I prefer , I prefer at at the first , eh , the the silence with eh , this eh this kind of the of eh of noise . professor d: Right , it 's  , it 's " Background " might be might be a better word than " silence " . phd c: And , with this information The idea is eh , eh , nnn , I have a label for for each , eh , frame and , eh with a cluster eh algorithm I and postdoc e: Well , we needed to get the categories , yeah . And eh I am going to prepare a test bed , eh , well , eh , a a set of feature structure eh , eh , models . phd c: I have to to test , but eh I phd a: You have your own ? phd c: Yeah , yeah , yeah . Is a modified version of of of a pitch tracker , eh , from , eh , Standar - eh Stanford University in Stanford ? No . phd a: Oh ! What 's it written in ? phd c: Eh , em , I I I don't remember what is the the name of the of the author , because I I have several I have eh , eh , em , eh , library tools , from eh , Festival and of from Edinburgh eh , from Cambridge , eh , and from our department . phd c: And And I have to because , in general the pitch tracker , doesn't work very well and grad b: Bad . This this is And th the idea is to to , eh , to obtain , eh , for example , eh , eh diff eh , eh , different well , no , a great number of eh FEC for example , eh , eh , twenty - five , eh , thirty thirty parameters , eh , for for each one . And in a first eh , nnn , step in the investi in the research in eh , my idea is try to , eh , to prove , what is the performance of the difference parameter , eh to classify the different , eh , what is the the the the front - end approach to classify eh , the different , eh , frames of each class eh and what is the the , nnn , nnn , nnn , eh , what is the , the error eh , of the data grad b: Supervised clustering . phd c: and the second is try to eh , to use some ideas eh , similar to the linear discriminant analysis . phd c: Eh ? Eh , similar , because the the idea is to to study what is the contribution of eh , each parameter to the process of classify correctly the different the different parameters . What sort of classifier ar ? phd c: Eh , the the the classifier is nnn by the moment is eh is eh , similar , nnn , that the classifier used eh , in a quantifier vectorial quantifier is eh , used to to eh , some distance to to put eh , a vector eh , in in a class different . grad b: Unimodal ? phd c: Is Yeah ? W with a model , is is only to cluster using a eh , @ @ or a similarity . grad b: So is it just one cluster per phd c: A another possibility it to use eh a netw netw a neural network . phd c: But eh what 's the p What is my idea ? What 's the problem I I I I see in in in if you you use the the neural network ? If w when this kind of eh , mmm , cluster , clustering algorithm to can test , to can eh observe what happened you you can't you can't eh , eh put up with your hand in the different parameter , grad b: Right , you can't analyse it . phd c: but eh If you use a neural net is is a good idea , but eh you don't know what happened in the interior of the neural net . professor d: Well , actually , you can do sensitivity analyses which show you what the importance of the different parce pieces of the input are . professor d: It 's hard to w w what you It 's hard to tell on a neural net is what 's going on internally . professor d: But it 's actually not that hard to analyse it and figure out the effects of different inputs , especially if they 're all normalized . professor d: Well , this isn't tru if if if you really wonder what different if if phd c: Yeah . phd c: But professor d: Yeah , then a decision tree is really good , but the thing is here he 's he 's not he 's not like he has one you know , a bunch of very distinct variables , like pitch and this he 's talking about , like , a all these cepstral coefficients , and so forth , grad b: Right . professor d: in which case a a any reasonable classifier is gonna be a mess , and it 's gonna be hard to figure out what what  phd c: And grad b: Right . professor d: I  , I think the other thing that one  , this is , I think a good thing to do , to sort of look at these things at least See what I 'd I 'd Let me tell you what I would do . Instead of taking all the MFCC 's , or all the PLP 's or whatever , I would just take a couple . professor d: OK ? Like like C - one , C - two , something like that , so that you can visualize it . professor d: OK , so before you do build up any kind of fancy classifiers , just take a look in two dimensions , at how these things are split apart . professor d: That I think will give you a lot of insight of what is likely to be a useful feature when you put it into a more complicated classifier . professor d: And the second thing is , once you actually get to the point of building these classifiers , @ @ what this lacks so far is the temporal properties . So if you 're just looking at a frame and a time , you don't know anything about , you know , the structure of it over time , and so you may wanna build @ @ build a Markov model of some sort  , or or else have features that really are based on  on on some bigger chunk of time . But don't  anyway , this is my suggestion , is don't just , you know , throw in twenty features at it , the deltas , and the delta del and all that into some classifier , even even if it 's K - nearest - neighbors , you still won't know phd c: Yeah . professor d: what it 's doing , even You know it 's  , I think to know what it 's to have a better feeling for what it 's grad b: Yep . professor d: look at at som some picture that shows you , " Here 's These things  ,  are offer some separation . " And , in LPC , the thing to particularly look at is , I think is something like , the residual phd c: Yeah . S postdoc e: Can I ask ? It strikes me that there 's another piece of information  , that might be useful and that 's simply the transition . So , w if you go from a transition of silence to overlap versus a transition from silence to speech , there 's gonna be a b a big informative area there , it seems to me . phd c: I eh the the Meeting Recorder project , for me , has eh , two eh , w has eh several parts , several p objective professor d:   But eh , at the first , in the acoustic , eh , eh , parts of the project , eh I think you eh we have eh two main eh objective . And for that , if you don't use , eh , eh , a speech recognizer , eh broad class , or not broad class to to try to to to label the different frames , I think the Ike criterion or BIC criterion eh will be enough to detect the change . When you you have , eh , eh s eh the transition of speech or or silence eh to overlap zone , this criterion is enough with probably with , eh , this kind of , eh , eh the the the more eh use eh use eh used eh em normal , regular eh parameter MF - MFCC . But eh eh I I understand that you your objective is to eh classify , to know that eh that zone not is only a new zone in the in the file , that eh you have eh , but you have to to to know that this is overlap zone . because in the future you will eh try to to process that zone with a non - regular eh eh speech recognizer model , I suppose . phd c: you you will pretend to to to process the overlapping z eh zone with another kind of algorithm professor d:   phd c: because it 's very difficult to to to obtain the transcription from eh using eh eh a regular , normal speech recognizer . phd c: A model to detect more acc the mor most accurately possible that is p  , will be possible the , eh the mark , the change and another another model will @ @ or several models , to try s but eh several model eh robust models , sample models to try to classify the difference class . grad b: I 'm I 'm I 'm sorry , I didn't understand you what you said . What what model ? postdoc e:  phd c: Eh , the the classifiers of the of the n to detect the different class to the different zones before try to to recognize , eh with eh to transcribe , with eh a speech recognizer . phd c: And my idea is to use eh , for example , a neural net postdoc e: So p phd c: with the information we obtain from this eh this eh study of the parameter with the selected parameter to try to eh to put the class of each frame . phd c: you you eh , eh have obtained in the first eh , step with the for example , BIC eh , eh criterion compare model postdoc e:   phd c: And You I don't - u professor d: OK , but , I I think in any event we 're agreed that the first step is phd c: i postdoc e: Yeah . professor d: Because what we had before for for  , speaker change detection did not include these overlaps . professor d: So the first thing is for you to to build up something that will detect the overlaps . professor d: Right ? So again , I think the first thing to do to detect the overlaps is to look at these  , in in in in grad b: Features ? phd c: Yeah . professor d: Well , I again , the things you 've written up there I think are way too way too big . professor d: OK ? If you 're talking about , say , twelfth twelfth - order  MFCC 's or something like that it 's just way too much . All you 'll be able to do is put it into a classifier and see how well it does . professor d: Whereas I think if you have things if you pick one or two dimensional things , or three of you have some very fancy display , and look at how the the different classes separate themselves out , you 'll have much more insight about what 's going on . professor d: Well , you 'll you 'll get a feeling for what 's happening , you know , phd c: Yeah . professor d: so if you look at Suppose you look at first and second - order cepstral coefficients for some one of these kinds of things and you find that the first - order is much more effective than the second , and then you look at the third and there 's not and not too much there , you may just take first and second - order cepstral coefficients , phd c: Yeah . professor d: right ? And with LPC , I think LPC per se isn't gonna tell you much more than than than the other , maybe .  , and  on the other hand , the LPC residual , the energy in the LPC residual , will say how well ,  the low - order LPC model 's fitting it , which should be pretty poorly for two two or more people speaking at the same time , and it should be pretty well , for w for for one . professor d: And so I i again , if you take a few of these things that are are prob  promising features and look at them in pairs , I think you 'll have much more of a sense of " OK , I now have  , doing a bunch of these analyses , I now have ten likely candidates . phd c: but eh , eh eh eh eh I don't know it is the first eh way to to do that and I would eh like to to know what eh , your opinion . Eh all this study in the f in the first moment , I I w I I will pretend to do with eh eh equalizes speech . grad b: With postdoc e: With what ? With what ? grad b: Right . phd c: Eh , why ? Because eh the spectral distortion is more eh a lot eh clearer , very much clearer if we compare with the PDA . phd c: fff ! Because the n the noise eh to sp the signal - to - noise relation is eh is is low . phd c: I don't know eh  i i that eh the the result of the of the study eh with eh with eh this eh this speech , the mix speech eh will work exactly with the eh PDA files . phd c: eh What , I  , what what is the effect of the low ' signal to to to noise relation , you know , eh with professor d: N u We Well , I think I think I think it 's not a it 's not at all unreasonable . It makes sense to start with the simpler signal because if you have features which don't aren't even helpful in the high signal - to - noise ratio , then there 's no point in putting them into the low signal ratio , one would think , anyway . professor d: And so , if you can get @ @  again , my prescription would be that you would , with a mixed signal , you would take a collection of possible  , features look at them , look at how these different classes that you 've marked , separate themselves , and then collect ,  in pairs , and then collect ten of them or something , and then proceed with a bigger classifier . professor d: And then if you can get that to work well , then you go to the other signal . And then , and you and you know , they won't work as well , but how m you know , how much grad b: Right . Because it I think it would be interesting to see if some features work well with close mixed , and And don't professor d:  . professor d: That 's well , the It it 's it 's true that it also , it could be useful to do this exploratory analysis where you 're looking at scatter plots and so on in both cases . phd c: I I I I think that the the eh parameter we found , eh , eh worked with both eh , speech file , postdoc e: That 's good . phd c: but eh what is the the the relation of eh of the performance when eh you use eh the , eh eh speech file the PDA speech files . Is eh is not easy eh to to solve , because if you I I I have seen the the the speech file from eh PDA , and s some parts is very difficult because you you don't see the spectrum the spectrogram . phd c: Is very difficult to apply eh , eh a parameter to detect change when you don't see . Well , that that that 's another reason why very simple features , things like energy , and things things like harmonicity , and residual energy are  , yeah are are better to use than very complex ones because they 'll be more reliable . phd a: Yeah , I maybe this is a dumb question , but w I thought it would be I thought it would be easier if you used a PDA professor d: Nah . phd a: because can't you , couldn't you like use beam - forming or something to detect speaker overlaps ?  grad b: Well , if you used the array , rather than the signal from just one . professor d: Yeah , no , you you 're you 're right grad b: But that 's professor d: that In fact , if we made use of the fact that there are two microphones , you do have some location information . which we don't have with the one and and so that 's phd a: Is that not allowed with this project ? professor d: well , no , we we don't have any rules , r really . professor d: I think I I think I think it 's it 's it 's a it 's an additional interesting question . professor d: I think you wanna know whether you can do it with one , because you know it 's not necessarily true that every device that you 're trying to do this with will have two . professor d: if , on the other hand , we show that there 's a huge advantage with two , well then that could be a real point . professor d: But , we don't n even know yet what the effect of detecting having the ability to detect overlaps is . postdoc e: There there is a complication though , and that is if a person turns their back to the to the PDA , then some of the positional information goes away ? phd c: Yeah . professor d: Well , it it it does , i it d it does , but the the the issue is that that phd a: No , it 's not it 's not that so much as postdoc e: And then , And if they 're on the access on the axis of it , that was the other thing I was thinking . postdoc e: He You mentioned this last time , that that if if you 're straight down the midline , then then the r the left - right 's gonna be different , grad b: Yeah , we hav need to put it on a little turntable , phd c: I I I I I th grad b: and phd a: Well , it 's phd c: Yeah . postdoc e: It seems to me that that it 's not a p  , you know , it 's this the topograph the topology of it is is a little bit complicated . phd a: I don't I don't know ho phd c: I I I think Sorry . I I I think because the the the distance between the two microph eh , microphone , eh , in the PDA is very near . But it 's  from my opinion , it 's an interesting idea to to try to study the binaural eh problem eh , with information , because I I found difference between the the speech from from each micro eh , in the PDA . It - it 's not amplitude , postdoc e: Oh yeah ! Oh I agree ! And we use it ourselves . postdoc e: But I 'm just I 'm just saying that the way we 're seated around a table , is not the same with respect to each to each person with respect to the PDA , phd c: No . postdoc e: so we 're gonna have a lot of differences with ref respect to the speaker . phd c: But professor d: That 's So so i @ @ I think the issue is , " Is there a clean signal coming from only one direction ? " phd a: Right . professor d: If it 's not coming from just one direction , if it if th if there 's a broader pattern , it means that it 's more likely there 's multiple people speaking , phd c: Yeah . phd a: So it 's sort of like how how confused is it about where the beam is . professor d: Yeah , is there a narrow Is there a narrow beam pattern or is it a a distributed beam pattern ? So if there 's a distributed beam pattern , then it looks more like it 's it 's  , multiple people . OK , it just it just seemed to me that  , that this isn't the ideal type of separation .  , I I think it 's I can see the value o professor d: Oh , ideal would be to have the wall filled with them , but  But the thing is just having two mikes If you looked at that thing on on Dan 's page , it was When when there were two people speaking , and it looked really really different . phd a: Did - Sorry , b  I 'm not sure what Dan 's page is that you mean . professor d: You take the signal from the two microphones and you cros and you cross - correlate them with different lags . So when one person is speaking , then wherever they happen to be at the point when they 're speaking , then there 's a pretty big maximum right around that point in the l in in the lag . professor d: So if at whatever angle you are , at some lag corresponding to the time difference between the two there , you get this boost in the in in the cross - correlation value function . phd a: So so if there 's two grad b: And if there are multiple people talking , you 'll see two peaks . postdoc e: Well , let me ask you , if if both people were over there , it would be less effective than if one was there and one was across , catty - corner ? phd c: Yeah . The - the Oh , I 'm sorry , postdoc e: No ? professor d: if they 're right next to one another ? phd a: If I was if I was here and Morgan was there and we were both talking , it wouldn't work . professor d: i i postdoc e: Next next one over n over on this side of the P PDA . postdoc e: Versus you versus you know , and we 're catty - corner across the table , and I 'm farther away from this one and you 're farther away from that one . grad b: Or or even if , like , if people were sitting right across from each other , you couldn't tell the difference either . Yeah , so it 's postdoc e: And so my point was just that it 's it 's gonna be differentially differentially varia valuable . postdoc e: it 's not to say  , I certainly think it 's extremely val And we we humans n n depend on you know , these these binaural cues . professor d: But it 's almost but it 's almost a I think what you 're talking about i there 's two things . professor d: There 's a sensitivity issue , and then there 's a pathological error  issue . professor d: If someone just happens to be sitting right there then we won't get good information from it . and i and if there So it And if it 's the two of you guys on the same side professor d: if they 're if they 're close , it 's just a question of the sensitivity . professor d: So if the sensitivity is good enough and we just we just don't have enough , experience with it to know how postdoc e: Yeah . postdoc e: Oh I 'm not I 'm not trying to argue against using it , by any means . I just wanted to point out that that weakness , that it 's topo topologically impossible to get it perfect for everybody . professor d: the other thing you can do  , if  , i We 're assuming that it would be a big deal just to get somebody convince somebody to put two microphones in the PDA . And then you know then you 're sort of Yeah , then then you pretty much could cover phd a: Once you got two postdoc e: Interesting . phd a: Well what about just doing it from these mikes ? postdoc e: Interesting . phd c: It will be more interesting to study the PZM because the the the separation I I think professor d:  @ @ But - but that 's  , we can we 'll be all of this is there for us to study . professor d: But but but the thing is , one of the at least one of the things I was hoping to get at with this is what can we do with what we think would be the normal situation if some people get together and one of them has a PDA . phd a: That 's what I was asking about , what are the constraints ? phd c: Yeah . professor d: Well , that 's that 's the constraint of one question that I think both Adam and I were were were interested in . professor d: but you know if you can instrument a room , this is really minor league compared with what some people are doing , right ? Some people at at  , yeah , at Brown and and and and at   and at Cape , grad b: Big micro @ @ arrays . phd a: Didn't they have something at Cape ? professor d: they both have these , you know , big arrays on the wall . And you know , if you could do that , you 've got microphones all over the place grad b: Very finely . professor d: you know p tens of microphones , and and  phd a: Oh ! I saw a demo . professor d: And if you do that then you can really get very nice  kind of selectivity phd a: Yeah . grad b: Oh , I saw one that was like a hundred microphones , a ten by ten array . phd a: And you could In a noisy room , they could have all kinds of noises and you can zoom right in on somebody . grad b: It was all in software and they and you could pick out an individual beam and listen to it . professor d: But , the reason why I haven't focused on that as the fir my first concern is because  , I 'm interested in what happens for people , random people out in some random place where they 're p having an impromptu discussion . And you can't just always go , " well , let 's go to this heavily instrumented room that we spent tens of thousands of dollars to se to set up " . phd a: No , what you need to do is you 'd have a little fabric thing that you unroll and hang on a wall . phd a: It has all these mikes and it has a plug - in jack to the PDA . grad b: But I think professor d: The other thing actually , that gets at this a little bit of something else I 'd like to do , is what happens if you have two P D grad b: Yep . professor d: and they communicate with each other ? And then You know , they 're in random positions , the likelihood that  , basically there wouldn't be any l likely to be any kind of nulls , if you even had two . grad b: Though All sorts of interesting things you can do with that , postdoc e: Interesting . grad b: not only can you do microphone arrays , but you can do all sorts of  multi - band as well . postdoc e: Ah ! phd a: I still like my rug on the wall idea , so if anybody patents that , then grad b: But I think postdoc e: Well , you could have strips that you stick to your clothing . phd a: Hats ? grad b: In terms of the research th research , it 's really it 's whatever the person who is doing the research wants to do .  , I i I i I would actually kind of like us to wind it down , see if we can still get to the end of the , birthdays thing there . professor d: So grad b: Well , I had a couple things that I did wanna bring out . grad b: One is , do we need to sign new these again ? postdoc e: Well , it 's slightly different . phd a: Are they new ? postdoc e: Cuz it it 's slightly different . professor d: Oh , this morning we didn't sign anything cuz we said that if anybody had signed it already , we didn't have to . grad b: Yeah , I I should 've checked with Jane first , but the ch the form has changed . grad b: I had some things I wanted to talk about with the thresholding stuff I 'm doing . postdoc e: I had to make one grad b: But , if we 're in a hurry , we can put that off . postdoc e: Well , should I  I have some results to present , but  I guess we won't have time to do that this time . But it seems like  the anonymization is  , is also something that we might wanna discuss in greater length .  , wha what postdoc e: If if we 're about to wind down , I think what I would prefer is that we  , delay the anonymization thing till next week , and I would like to present the results that I have on the overlaps . @ @ It sounds like u  , there were there were a couple technical things people would like to talk about . Why don't we just take a couple minutes to to briefly do them , and then and then and then and then and then we grad b: OK , go ahead , Jane . postdoc e: I 'd Oh , I 'd prefer to have more time for my results . postdoc e: And I think the anonymization , if y if you want to proceed with that now , I just think that that 's that 's a discussion which also n really deserves a lo a you know , more that just a minute . postdoc e: I really do think that , because you raised a couple of possibilities yourself , you and I have discussed it previously , and there are different ways that people approach it , e and I think we should grad b: Alright . We 're we 're just We 're getting enough data now that I 'd sort of like to do it now , before I get overwhelmed with once we decide how to do it postdoc e: Well , OK . I I 'll give you the short version , but I do think it 's an issue that we can't resolve in five minutes . postdoc e: OK , so the the short thing is  , we have  , tape recording  , sorry , digitized recor recordings . postdoc e: Now , in terms of like the transcript , the question becomes what symbol are you gonna put in there for everybody 's name , and whether you 're gonna put it in the text where he says " Hey Roger " or are we gonna put that person 's anonymized name in instead ? grad b: No , because then that would give you a mapping , and you don't wanna have a mapping . postdoc e: OK , so first decision is , we 're gonna anonymize the same name for the speaker identifier and also in the text whenever the speaker 's name is mentioned . Because that would give you a mapping between the speaker 's real name and the tag we 're using , and we don't want postdoc e: I I don't think you understood what I what I said . postdoc e: So  , so in within the context of an utterance , someone says " So , Roger , what do you think ? " OK . Then , it seems to me that Well , maybe I  it seems to me that if you change the name , the transcript 's gonna disagree with the audio , and you won't be able to use that . grad b: We don't we wanna we ha we want the transcript to be " Roger " . grad b: Because if we made the the transcript be the tag that we 're using for Roger , someone who had the transcript and the audio would then have a mapping between the anonymized name and the real name , and we wanna avoid that . postdoc e: OK , well , but then there 's this issue of if we 're gonna use this for a discourse type of thing , then and , you know , Liz was mentioning stuff in a previous meeting about gaze direction and who 's who 's the addressee and all , then to have " Roger " be the thing in the utterance and then actually have the speaker identifier who was " Roger " be " Frank " , that 's going to be really confusing and make it pretty much useless for discourse analysis . postdoc e: Now , if you want to , you know , in some cases , I I I know that Susan Ervin - Tripp in some of hers , actually did do  , a filter of the s signal where the person 's name was mentioned , except professor d: Yeah Yeah , once you get to the publication you can certainly do that . postdoc e: And and I cer and I So , the question then becomes one level back .  , how important is it for a person to be identified by first name versus full name ? Well , on the one hand , it 's not a full identity , we 're taking all these precautions ,  and they 'll be taking precautions , which are probably even the more important ones , to they 'll be reviewing the transcripts , to see if there 's something they don't like OK . On the other hand , this is a small this is a small pool , and people who say things about topic X e who are researchers and well - known in the field , they 'll be identifiable and simply from the from the first name . However , taking one step further back , they 'd be identifiable anyway , even if we changed all the names . postdoc e: So , is it really ,  You know ? grad b: Ugh ! postdoc e: Now , in terms of like so I I did some results , which I 'll report on n next time , which do mention individual speakers by name . Now , it would be very possible for me to take those data put them in a in a study , and just change everybody 's name for the purpose of the publication . And someone who looked professor d: You can go , you know , " Z "  , for instance .  , yeah , t it doesn't  , I 'm not knowledgeable about this , but it certainly doesn't bother me to have someone 's first name in in the in the transcript . postdoc e: Yeah , and and in the form that they sign , it does say " your first name may arise in the course of the meetings " . So again , th the issue is if you 're tracking discourse things , you know , if someone says , " Frank said this " and then you wanna connect it to something later , you 've gotta have this part where that 's " Frank colon " . grad b: Yeah , shoot ! professor d: Right ? postdoc e: Yeah , and and you know , even more i i  , immediate than that just being able to ,  Well , it just seems like to track track from one utterance to the next utterance who 's speaking and who 's speaking to whom , cuz that can be important . postdoc e: S i You know , " You raised the point , So - and - so " , it 's be kind of nice to be able to know who " you " was . postdoc e: And ac and actually you remember furthermore , you remember last time we had this discussion of how you know , I was sort of avoiding mentioning people 's names , professor d: Yeah , I was too . Well , if we 're going to step in after the fact and change people 's names in the transcript , we 've basically done something one step worse . Well , I would sug I I don't wanna change the names in the transcript , phd c: Yeah . grad b: but that 's because I 'm focused so much on the acoustics instead of on the discourse , and so I think that 's a really good point . L let me just back up this to make a a brief comment about the , what we 're covering in the meeting .  I realize when you 're doing this that   , I didn't realize that you had a bunch of things that you wanted to talk about . So I think what would be helpful would be  , i and I 'll I 'll mention this to to Liz and Andreas too , that  , before the meeting if anybody could send me , any any , agenda items that they were interested in and I 'll I 'll take the role of organizing them  , into into the agenda , postdoc e: OK . I 've no desire to to make it up , but if if no one 's told me things , then I 'm just proceeding from my my guesses , and and  , and i ye yeah , I I 'm sorry it ended up with your out your time to  , I 'm just always asking Jose what he 's doing , you know , and and so it 's There 's  , there 's obviously other things going on . grad b: How will we how would the person who 's doing the transcript even know who they 're talking about ? Do you know what I 'm saying ? phd a: " The person who 's doing the transcript " The IBM people ? grad b: Yeah .  , so so how is that information gonna get labeled anyway ? postdoc e: How do you mean , who what they 're who they 're talking about ? grad b: so if I 'm saying in a meeting , " oh and Bob , by the way , wanted wanted to do so - and - so " , postdoc e: How do you mean ? phd a: They 're just gonna write " Bob " on it or do @ @ grad b: if you 're doing Yeah , @ @ they 're just gonna write " Bob " . If you 're if you 're doing discourse analysis , postdoc e: They won't be able to change it themselves . professor d: What ar how are they gonna do any of this ? grad b: Yeah , really . postdoc e: Well , I I 'm betting we 're gonna have huge chunks that are just totally un untranscribable by them . professor d: they 're gonna say speaker - one , or speaker - two or speaker  I I phd a: They can't do that . phd c: Yeah , I think grad b: Well , the current one they don't do speaker identity . phd c:  grad b: because in NaturallySpeaking , or , excuse me , in ViaVoice , it 's only one person . I think that My understanding from Yen Is it Yen - Ching ? Is that how you pronounce her name ? professor d:  Yu - Ching , Yu - Ching . postdoc e: Oh ,  Yu - Ching ? Yu - Ching ? grad b: y Yu - Ching . postdoc e: was that  , they will that they will adopt the part of the conventions that that we discussed , where they put speaker identifier down . But , you know , h they won't know these people , so I think it 's Well , they 'll they 'll adopt some convention but we haven't specified to them So they 'll do something like speaker - one , speaker - two , is what I bet , but I 'm betting there 'll be huge variations in the accuracy of of their labeling the speakers . professor d: And it and it may very well be  , since they 're not going to sit there and and and worry ab about , it being the same speaker , they may very well go the eh the the first se the first time it changes to another speaker , that 'll be speaker - two . professor d: And the next time it 'll be speaker - three even if it 's actually speaker - one . grad b: Yeah we we can probably regenerate it pretty easily from the close - talking mikes . phd c:  postdoc e: Yes , I was thinking , the temp the time values of when it changes . grad b: The p It 's a good point , " which what do you do for discourse tracking ? " phd c: Because y y you don't know to know , eh you don't need to know what i what is the iden identification of the of the speakers . If if if if someone says , " what what is Jose doing ? " and then Jose says something , you need to know that that was Jose responding . postdoc e: Unless we adopt a different set of norms which is to not id to make a point of not identifying people by name , which then leads you to be more contextually ex explicit . You know ?  , so when we did this las last week , I felt that you know , now , Andreas may , @ @  , he he i sometimes people think of something else at the same time and they miss a sentence or something , and and because he missed something , then he missed the r the initial introduction of who we were talking about , and was was unable to do the tracking . postdoc e: But I felt like most of us were doing the tracking and knew who we were talking about and we just weren't mentioning the name . phd a: But , you know , like , at the beginning of this meeting Or , you I think said , you know , or s Liz , said something about  , " is Mari gonna use the equipment ? "  , how would you say that ? postdoc e: Yeah ? phd a: you have to really think , you know , about what you 're saying bef grad b: if you wanted to anonymize . Yeah , is professor d: " Is you know who up in you know where ? " phd a: Yeah . professor d: Right ? Use the phd a: I think it would be really hard if we made a policy where we didn't say names , plus we 'd have to tell everybody else . grad b: Yeah , darn !  , what I was gonna say is that the other option is that we could bleep out the names . phd a: I I think the I think I don't know , my own two cents worth is that you don't do anything about what 's in the recordings , you only anonymize to the extent you can , the speakers have signed the forms and all . grad b: Well , but that but that as I said , that that that works great for the acoustics , but it it hurts you a lot for trying to do discourse . grad b: Because you don't have a map of who 's talking versus their name that they 're being referred to . phd a: I thought we were gonna get it labelled speaker - one , speaker - two grad b: Sure but , h then you have to know that Jose is speaker - one and phd a: Why do you have to know his name ? professor d: OK , so suppose someone says , " well I don't know if I really heard what  , what Jose said . professor d: So  u phd a: Oh , I see , you wanna associated the word " Jose " in the dialogue with the fact that then he responded . professor d: And so , if we pass out the data to someone else , and it says " speaker - five " there , we also have to pass them this little guide that says that speaker - five is Jose , grad b: And that violates our privacy . professor d: and if were gonna do that we might as well give them " Jose " say it was " Jose " . postdoc e: Now , I I think that we have these two phases in the in the data , which is the one which is o our use , University of Washington 's use , IBM , SRI . postdoc e: And within that , it may be that it 's sufficient to not  change the to not incorporate anonymization yet , but always , always in the publications we have to . postdoc e: And I think also , when we take it that next step and distribute it to the world , we have to . But I but I don that 's that 's a long way from now and and it 's a matter of between now and then of d of deciding how grad b: Making some decisions ? postdoc e: i i it You know , it may be s that we we 'll need to do something like actually X out that part of the  the audio , and just put in brackets " speaker - one " . phd c: the ? ? grad b: You know , what we could do also is have more than one version of release . professor d: I I think that we we have a need to have a consistent licensing policy of some sort , and postdoc e: But I also think a consistent licensing policy is important . phd a: Well , one thing to to take into consideration is w are there any  For example , the people who are funding this work , they want this work to get out and be useful for discourse . phd a: If we all of a sudden do this and then release it to the public and it 's not longer useful for discourse , you know grad b: Well , depending on how much editing we do , you might be able to still have it useful . grad b: But , n excuse me , but you could bleep out just the names . professor d: She No , but she 's saying , from the argument before , she wants to be able to say if someone said " Jose " in their in their thing , and then connect to so to what he said later , then you need it . But in the transcript , you could say , everywhere they said " Jose " that you could replace it with " speaker - seven " . But I I also wanna say that people grad b: And then it wouldn't meet match the audio anymore . professor d: And th and the other thing is if if if Liz were here , what she might say is that she wants to look if things that cut across between the audio and the dialogue , postdoc e: Well , you see ? So , it 's complicated . postdoc e: But it 's g but I think it was good to introduce the thing and we can do it next time . grad b: I didn't think when I wrote you that email I wasn't thinking it was a big can of worms , but I guess it is . postdoc e: Well it Discourse , you know Also I wanted to make the point that that discourse is gonna be more than just looking at a transcript . postdoc e: It 's gonna be looking at a t You know , and prosod prosodic stuff is involved , and that means you 're going to be listening to the audio , and then you come directly into this confronting this problem . phd a: Maybe we should just not allow anybody to do research on discourse , postdoc e: So . professor d: maybe we should only have meetings between people who don't know one another and who are also amnesiacs who don't know their own name . grad b: Did you read the paper on Eurospeech ? postdoc e: We could have little labels . I I I wanna introduce my Reservoir Dogs solution again , which is everyone has like " Mister White " , " Mister Pink " , " Mister Blue " . Did you read the paper a few years ago where they were reversing the syllables ? They were di they they had the utterances . phd a: But so , the syllables were in the same order , with respect to each other , but the acous grad b: Everything was in the same order , but they were the individual syll syllables were played backwards . phd a: What did it sound like ? grad b: People had no difficulty in interpreting it . So what we need is something that 's the reverse , that a speech recognizer works exactly the same on it but people can't understand it . professor d: What , what does the speech recognizer care ? grad b: Ah , anyway . professor d: postdoc e: Oh , do we do digits ? Or ? What do we do ? grad b:  OK , we 'll quickly do digits . like as if you were talking like , " nine eight six eight seven ? " postdoc e: Well , you know , in the in the one I transcribed , I did find a couple instances I found one instance of contrastive stress , where it was like the string had a li So it was like " nine eight two four , nine nine two four " . So they were like looking ahead , postdoc e: And phd a: huh ? postdoc e: Well , they differed .  , I 've I am sort of interested in in And sometimes , you know , I s And I I never know . phd a: Well , I was thinking that it must get kind of boring for the people who are gonna have to transcribe this postdoc e: and I phd a: They may as well throw in some interesting intonations
professor a: We 're not recording yet , are we ? grad g: Well , I don't think phd f: No , that that wasn't recorded . phd f: I guess I have to d stop doing this sigh of contentment , you know , after sipping cappuccino or something . phd f: I was just noticing a big s professor d: So are we recording now ? Is this phd e: Yeah . professor d: So , what were we gonna talk about again ? So we said we said data collection , which we 're doing . Do we do th do you go around the room and do names or anything ? grad g: I think that phd e: It 's a good idea . grad g: u usually we 've done that and also we 've s done digits as well , but I forgot to print any out . Besides with this big a group , phd b: You can write them on the board , if you want . I it 'd be even better with this big grad g: it would take too much time . phd e: Mari ? postdoc h: What professor a: What ? professor d: It 's not that long . professor d: w u phd e: So that thing the little th that part should be pointing upwards . professor a: It 's kind of professor d: Oh , yeah , the element , yeah , n should be as close to you your mouth as possible . So what we had was that we were gonna talk about data collection , and , you you put up there data format , professor a:  . professor d: and other tasks during data collection , professor a: So , I think the goal the goal was what can we do how can you do the data collection differently to get professor d: and professor a: what can you add to it to get , some information that would be helpful for the user - interface design ? Like grad g: especially for querying . postdoc h: Well , one thing that came up in the morning in the morning was the , i  , if he I ,  if he has s I I don't remember , Mister Lan - Doctor Landry ? grad g: Landay . postdoc h: La - Landay ? So he has , these , tsk note - taking things , professor a:   postdoc h: then that would sort of be a summary which you wouldn't have to solicit . professor a: Well , if if you actually take notes as a summary as opposed to n take notes in the sense of taking advantage of the time - stamps . So action item or  , reminder to send this to so - and - so , blah - blah - blah . grad g: But if we had the CrossPads , we could ask people , you know , if if something comes up write it down and mark it somehow , postdoc h:   And so , you know phd f: the down - side to that is that he sort of indicated that the , quality of the handwriting recognition was quite poor . I don't think there 'd be so many that you couldn't have someone clean it up professor a: So grad g: pretty easily . We also could come up with some code for things that people want to do so that for frequent things . So , if that you know , if if we just keep it simple then maybe it 's still useful . professor d: I just realized we skipped the part that we were saying we were gonna do at the front where we each said who we were . professor a: But anyway , shall we do the roll call ? professor d: No , not a No , I just My mind went elsewhere . So , yeah , I 'm Morgan , and where am I ? I 'm on channel three . postdoc h: Should we have used pseudo - names ? Should we do it a second time with pseudo No . professor d: I 'm Rocky Raccoon on channel phd e: Let me , turn that off . grad g: And , do you want to do the P D As and the P Z phd e: Oh . phd e: PDM - right , PZA - right PDA - right , PDA - left . grad g: Yeah , and eventually once this room gets a little more organized , the Jimlets will be mounted under the table , and these guys will be permanently mounted somehow . postdoc h: I have a question on protocol in these meetings , which is when you say " Jimlet " and the person listening won't know what that is , sh shou How how do we get Is that important information ? You know , the Jimlet  , the box that contains the professor d: Well , suppose we broaden out and go to a range of meetings besides just these internal ones . There 's gonna be lots of things that any group of people who know each other have in column common that we will not know . professor d: we we were originally gonna do this with VLSI design , and and and the reason we didn't go straight to that was because immediately ninety percent of what we heard would be jargon to to us . Should we do it and , if so , what 'll we have them do ?  , do we have s people write summaries ? Everybody or one person ? And then , do we ask people for how they would query things ? Is that phd f: There 's there 're sub - problems in that , in that where or when do you actually ask them about that ? professor a: Right . phd f: that was One thing I was thinking about was is that Dan said earlier that , you know , maybe two weeks later , which is when you would want to query these things , you might ask them then . phd f: But there 's a problem with that in that if you 're not If you don't have an interactive system , it 's gonna be hard to go beyond sort of the first level of question . professor d: There 's there 's another problem grad g: And professor d: which is , we certainly do want to branch out beyond , recording meetings about Meeting Recorder . And , once we get out beyond our little group , the people 's motivation factor , reduces enormously . And if we start giving them a bunch of other things to do , how you know , we we did n you know another meeting here for another group and and , they were fine with it . But if we 'd said , " OK , now all eight of you have to have to come up with , the summar " grad g: Well , I asked them to and none of them did . grad g: So , I I asked them to send me ideas for queries after the meeting postdoc h:   grad g: So I didn't track them down and say " please do th do it now " . professor d: I I 'm worried that if you did even if you did push them into it , it it it might be semi - random , professor a: Right . professor d: as opposed to what you 'd really want to know if you were gonna use this thing . grad g: I just don't know how else to generate the queries other than getting an expert to actually listen to the meeting and say " that 's important , that might be a query " . Well , there is this other thing which y which you were alluding to earlier , which is , there are certain key words like , you know , " action item " and things like that , which could be used in , t to some degree finding the structure . phd e: Although professor a: W postdoc h: And and I also , was thinking , with reference to the n  , note - taking , the advantage there is that you get structure without the person having to do something artificial later . And the fir third thing I wanted to say is the summaries afterwards , I think they should be recorded instead of written because I think that , it would take so long for people to write that I think you wouldn't get as good a summary . professor a: How about this idea ? That normally at most meetings somebody is delegated to be a note - taker . professor a: And So why don't we just use the notes that somebody takes ? postdoc h: Yeah . grad g: that gives you a summary but it doesn't really How do you generate queries from that ? phd e: Well . But , maybe a summary is one of the things we 'd want from the output of the system . phd b: Actually And so grad g: James and I were talking about this during one of the breaks . And the problem with that is , I 'm definitely going to do something with information retrieval even if it 's sort of not full full - bore what I 'm gonna do for my thesis . And so if someone wants to do that , that 's fine , but it 's not gonna be me . professor d: Well , I think that we  , the the f the core thing is that you know once we get some of these issues nailed down , we need to do a bunch of recordings professor a: Well professor d: and send them off to IBM and get a bunch of transcriptions even if they 're slightly flawed grad g: Yep . professor d: And then , i i we can start l looking and thinking , what do we want to know about these things and at the very least . So , if you could sense just when people are writing , and you tell them not to doodle , or try not to be using that for other purposes , and each person has a note pad . Then you c you can just have a fff plot of wh you know , who 's writing when . But I bet that 's that will allow you to go into the sort of the hot places where people are writing things down . phd b: you can tell when you 're in a meeting when everybody stops to write something down that something was just said . phd b: It may not be kept in the later summary , but at that point in time is was something that was important . phd b: And that wouldn't take any extra postdoc h: That 's a nice idea . phd b: Or someone could just pu you could just put your hand on the pad professor d: It professor c:   It 's professor d: That 's a good idea but that doesn't Maybe I 'm missing something , but that doesn't get to the question of how we come up with queries , right ? professor a: Well , what it does phd b: Well , then you can go to the points where the you could actually go to those points in time and find out what they were talking about . phd b: And grad g: y professor a: I I think it 's an interesting thing . I don't think it gets at the the queries per - se , but it does give us an information fusion sort of thing that , you know , you wanna i say " what were the hot - points of the meeting ? " phd b: Yeah . professor d: That that 's what  , is that I think it gets at something interesting but if we were asking the question , which I thought we were , of of of , " how do we figure out what 's the nature of the queries that people are gonna want to ask of such a system ? " , knowing what 's important doesn't tell you what people are going to be asking . phd e: Well , see , there are th professor a: I think you could say they 're gonna ask about , when  , when did so - and - so s talk about blah . phd b: At least you can find the locations where there are maybe keywords professor d: Maybe . grad g: i this would tell you what the hit is , phd b: and grad g: not what the query is . grad g: And so you could you can generate a query from the hits , professor a: Right . grad g: but phd b: We don't even know what  , if you want to find out what any user will use , that might be true for one domain and one user , professor d:   professor d: Yeah , but we 're just looking for a place to start with that phd b:  . professor d: because , you know , th what what what James is gonna be doing is looking at the user - interface and he 's looking at the query in in i We we have five hours of pilot data of the other stuff but we have zero hours of of of queries . So he 's just sort of going " where where do I where do I start ? " professor a: w Well , th you could do I think the summaries actually may help get us there , professor d: OK . One , if you have a summary if you have a bunch of summaries , you can do a word frequency count and see what words come up in different types of meetings . professor a: So " action item " is gonna come up whether it 's a VLSI meeting , or speech meeting , or whatever . So words that come up in different types of meetings may be something that you would want to query about . professor a: the second thing you could possibly do with it is just run a little pilot experiment with somebody saying " here 's a summary of a meeting , what questions might you want to ask about it to go back ? " grad g: Yeah , I think that 's difficult because then they 're not gonna ask the questions that are in the summary . professor a: Well grad g: But , I think it would give professor a: That 's one possi one possible scenario , though , is you have the summary , grad g:   So that that is another use of Meeting Recorder that we haven't really talked about , which is for someone else , as opposed to as a remembrance agent , which is what had been my primary thought in the information retrieval part of it would be . But , I guess if you had a meeting participant , they could use the summary to refresh themselves about the meeting and then make up queries . phd e: But th there is this ,  There is this class of queries , which are the things that you didn't realize were important at the time but some in retrospect you think " oh , hang on , didn't we talk about that ? " And it 's something that didn't appear in the summary but you professor a:   phd e: And that 's kind of what this kind of , complete data capture is kind of nicest for . phd e: Cuz it 's the things that you wouldn't have bothered to make an effort to record but they get recorded . So ,  And th there 's no way of generating those , u u until we just until they actually occur . phd e: But  , it 's difficult to sort of say " and if I was gonna ask four questions about this , what would they be ? " Those aren't the kind of things that come up . postdoc h: I also think that w if if you can use the summaries as an indication of the important points of the of the meeting , then you might get something like y So if th if the obscure item you want to know more about was some form of data collection , you know , maybe the summary would say , you know , " we discussed types of na data collection " . If you if you had the the larger structure of the of the discourse , then if you can categorize what it is that you 're looking for with reference to those l those larger headings , then you can find it even if you don't have a direct route to that . postdoc h: I think that grad g: That 's a pretty fine grain that the note - taker will have to take . I think you got to have somebody who knows the pro knows the topic or you know , whose job it is delegated to be the note - taker . phd b: No , but someone who can come sit in on the meetings and then takes the notes with them that the real note - taker grad g: But they phd b: And that way that one student has , you know , a rough idea of what was going on , and they can use it for their research .  , this isn't really necessarily what you would do in a real system , grad g:   But if he has some students that want to study that then they should sort of get to know the people and attend those meetings , professor d:   Their sort of note - taking application stuff they 've been doing for the last couple of years , and I don't think anyone is still working on it . grad g: And so the question is " is there such a person ? " And I think right now , the answer is " no " . professor a: Well professor d: I 've b been thinking grad g: We 'll just have to see . professor d: I 've been thinking about it a little bit here about the  , th this , e  I think that the now I 'm thinking that the summary a summary , is actually a reasonable , bootstrap into this into what we 'd like to get at . It 's it 's not ideal , but we you know , we we have to get started someplace . So I was I was just thinking about , suppose we wanted to get w We have this collection of meeting . So now we have five hours of meetings and , you ask me , " Morgan , what d you know , what kind of questions do you want to ask ? "  , I wouldn't have any idea what kind of questions I want to ask . So in fact if I looked at summary of it , I 'd go " oh , yeah , I was in that meeting , I remember that , what was the part that " And and th I think that might then help me to think of things even things that aren't listed in the summary , but just as a as a as a refresh of what the general thing was going on in the meeting . One , as sort of a refresh to help bootstrap queries , professor d:   professor a:  phd b: So how does the summary get generated ? professor a: Well , i i ? phd b: I 'm not against the idea of a summary , grad g: By hand . phd b: but I wanted to think carefully about who 's generating it professor a: Or , d o phd b: and how because the summary will drive the queries . professor a: What I I think , you know , in most meetings , phd b: So professor a: this one being different , but in most meetings that I attend , there 's somebody t explicitly taking notes , frequently on a laptop  , you can just make it be on a laptop , phd b:   professor a: so then yo you 're dealing with ASCII and not somebody you don't have to go through handwriting recognition . postdoc h: I I I think that , there 's we 're using " summary " in two different ways . postdoc h: And what I originally thought was , if you asked someone " what was the meeting about ? " phd b: OK . postdoc h: And then they would say " well , we talked about this and then we talked about that , and so - and - so talked about " And then you 'd have , like I e My thought was to have multiple people summarize it , on recording rather than writing because writing takes time and you get irrelevant other things that u take time , that professor a:   postdoc h: Whereas if you just say it immediately after the meeting , you know , a two - minute summary of what the meeting was about , I think you would get , with mult See , I I also worry about having a single note - taker because that 's just one person 's perception . And , you know , it it 's releva it 's relative to what you 're focus was on that meeting , professor d:   professor d: A postdoc h: So , my proposal would be that it may be worth considering both of those types , you know , the note - taking and a spontaneous oral summary afterwards , professor a: OK . postdoc h: no longer than two minutes , professor d: Adam , you can postdoc h: from multiple people . professor d: but but , my impression was that , pretty much , true that the meetings here , nobody sits with a w  , with a laptop grad g: Never . Does anyone ? phd b: Dan ? professor d: I grad g: Dan is the one who who most frequently would take notes , phd e: Yeah . Most of the meetings we have are four or five people grad g: That 's true are four or five people . professor d: and you 're not you don't have somebody sitting and taking minutes for it . professor a: So , I think it depends on whether it 's a business meeting or a technical discussion . grad g: The IRAM meeting , they they take notes every professor d: Do they ? grad g: There 's  a person with a laptop at each meeting . phd b: I don't know how , but for instance , the outline is sort of up here and that 's what people are seeing . phd e: We sh we should grad g: I agree , but but you you just you g end up with video , postdoc h: I agree . phd e: f u I think for this data capture , it would be nice to have a digital camera grad g: Yeah , different phd b: y phd e: just to take pictures of who 's there , where the microphones are , and then we could also put in what 's on the board . grad g: But don't you think that 's Don't you think that But postdoc h: I agree .  , I I just think  , I think that right now we don't make a record of where people are sitting on the tables . phd e: Not not as part of the not as a part of the data that you have to recover . phd e: Just just in terms of phd b: We should just Like archiving it or storing it . postdoc h: It 's i because discourse is about things , phd b: Because someone postdoc h: and then you have the things that are about , and it 's recoverable . phd b: someone later might be able to take these and say " OK , they , you know at least these are the people who were there phd e: So phd b: and here 's sort of what they started talking about , and " and just postdoc h: Yes . professor d: Li postdoc h: Like you said , three snapshots professor d: L L L postdoc h: and professor d: Liz , you postdoc h: Just to archive . professor d: u  , Liz , you sa you sat in on the , subcommittee meeting or whatever phd e: Actually professor d: on you on the subcommittee meeting for for at the ,  that workshop we were at that , Mark Liberman was was having . They they they they h must have had some discussion about video and the visual aspect , and all that . But I 'm just saying first of all there 's a whole bunch of fusion issues that DARPA 's interested in . And there 's also I think a personal interest on the part of Mark Liberman in this kind of in storing these images in any data we collect professor d:   phd b: And professor d: I think you  , that the key thing there is that this is a description of database collection effort that they 're talking about doing . professor d: And if the database exists and includes some visual information that doesn't mean that an individual researcher is going to make any use of it . professor d: So ,  grad g: But that it 's gonna be a lot of effort on our part to create it , and store it , and get all the standards , and to do anything with it . So we 're gonna So we 're gonna do what we 're gonna do , whatever 's reasonable for us . phd b: I think even doing something very crude professor d: But having phd b: Like I know with ATIS , we just had a tape recorder running all the time . phd b: And later on it turned out it was really good that you had a tape recorder of what was happening , even though you w you just got the speech from the machine . So if you can find some really , you know , low , perplexity , grad g: Low fidelity . And if it 's simple as  , as simple as just the digital phd b: Otherwise you 'd you lose it . professor d: Well , minimally , what what Dan is referring to at least having some representation of the p the spatial position of the people , postdoc h: Yeah . professor d: so ,  grad g: Well , once the room is a little more fixed that 's a little easier professor d: Yeah . grad g: But phd b: Also CMU has been doing this and they were the most vocal at this meeting , Alex Waibel 's group . And they have said , I talked to the student who had done this , that with two fairly inexpensive cameras they they just recorded all the time professor d:   phd b: and were able to get all the information from or maybe it was three from all the parts of the room . So I think we would be we might lose the chance to use this data for somebody later who wants to do some kind of processing on it if we don't collect it at all . The problem with it is you 'll have more people who don't want to be filmed than who don't want to be recorded . grad g: So that there 's going to be another group of people who are gonna say " I won't participate " . phd b: Or you could put a paper bag over everybody 's head grad g:  phd b: and not look at each other and not look at boards , and just all be sitting talking . phd b: That would be an interes Bu postdoc h: Well professor d: Great idea . But I think y she 's we 're just proposing a minimal preservation of things on boards , phd b: Yeah . postdoc h: sp spatial organization And you could anonymize the faces for that matter . You know , this is grad g: But , you know , that 's a lot of infrastructure and work . postdoc h: We can talk about the grad g: To set it up and then anonymize it ? postdoc h: It 's just one snapshot . phd b: No , it wa n not ,  professor a: No , no , no , no . Maybe we don't want to spend that much more time discussing it , phd f: Did they store it digitally , or ? postdoc h: but phd b:   I think they just phd f: or just put it on videotape ? phd b: I think they just had the videotapes with a c you know , a counter or something . Well , I think for  , for our purposes we probably will d phd b: I 'm not sure . professor d: we we might try that some and and we certainly already have some recordings that don't have that , which , you know , we we 'll we 'll get other value out of , I think . postdoc h: Th The thing is , if it 's easy to collect it it th then I think it 's a wise thing to do because once it 's gone it 's gone . And phd b: I 'm just The community If LDC collects this data u  , and L - if Mark Liberman is a strong proponent of how they collect it and what they collect , there will probably be some video data in there . phd b: And so that could argue for us not doing it or it could argue for us doing it . The only place where it sort of overlaps is when some of the summarization issues are actually could be , easier made easier if you had the video . professor d: I think at the moment we should be determining this on the basis of our own , interests and needs rather than hypothetical ones from a community thing . professor d: As you say , if they if they decide it 's really critical then they will collect a lot more data than we can afford to , and and will include all that . professor d: professor a: e professor d: I I I 'm not worried about the cost of setting it up . In other words , it 's it it 'd be kind of silly to collect it all and not look at it at all . And so I I I think that we do have to do some picking and choosing of the stuff that we 're doing . But I I am int I do think that we m minimally want something we might want to look at at some some , subsets of that . Like for a meeting like this , at least , take a Polaroid of the of the of the boards , phd b: Of the board . phd b: Or at least make sure that the note - taker takes a sh you know , a snapshot of the board . professor d: a and know the position of the people phd b: That 'll make it a lot easier for meetings that are structured . phd b: otherwise later on if nobody wrote this stuff on the board down we 'd have a harder time summarizing it or agreeing on a summary .  , this is shared knowledge among all the participants , and it 's a shame to keep it off the recording . grad g: except in postdoc h: s grad g: er , if we weren't recording this , this this would get lost .  , I just think that the grad g: The point is that we 're not saving it anyway . postdoc h: Well professor a: What do you mean we 're not saving it anyway ? I 've written all of this down and it 's getting emailed to you . That would be the other alternative , to make sure that anything that was on the board , is in the record . postdoc h: Well professor a: Well , that 's why that 's why I 'm saying that I think the note - taking would be I think in many for many meetings there will be some sort of note - taking , in which case , that 's a useful thing to have  , we  , we don't need to require it . professor a: so so we won't worry about requiring these things , but the more things that we can get it for , the more useful it will be for various applications . professor d: So So , departing for the moment from the data collection question but actually talking about , you know , this group and what we actually want to do , so I guess that 's th the way what you were figuring on doing was was was , putting together some notes and sending them to to everybody from from today ? OK . professor d: So so the question that that we started with was whether there was anything else we should do during during th during the collection . professor d: And I guess the CrossPads was certainly one idea , and we 'll get them from him and we 'll just do that . Right ? And then the next thing we talked about was the was the summaries and are we gonna do anything about that . professor a: So , if I 'm collecting data then there is this question of do I use CrossPads ? professor d: Yeah . professor a: So , I think that if we really seriously have me collect data and I can't use CrossPads , it 's probably less useful for you guys to go to the trouble of using it , unless you think that the CrossPads are gonna n I 'm not I 'm not sure what they 're gonna do . But but having a small percentage of the data with it , I 'm not sure whether that 's useful or not . professor d: I guess the point was to try again , to try to collect more information that could be useful later for for the UI stuff . professor d: So it 's sort of Landay supplying it so that Landay 's stuff can be easier to do . professor d: So it it Right now he 's g operating from zero , professor a: Nothing . professor d: and so even if we didn't get it done from UW , it seems like that would could still You shou professor a: OK . phd b: I think it 'd be useful to have a small amount of it just as a proof of concept . grad g: And and they seem to not be able to give enough of them away , so we could probably get more as well . So if it if it seems to be really useful to you guys , we could probably get a donation to me . I think it it it will again depend on Landay , and if he has a student who 's interested , and how much infrastructure we 'll need . grad g: but if it requires a lot of our time , we probably won't do it . professor d: I guess a lot of the stuff we 're doing now really is pilot in one sense or another . That if if people have something in front of them phd b: I 'd be sort of cool . So , I j I think we should just say this is not we don't want to put any extra burden on people , but if they happen to generate minutes , could could they send it to us ? grad g: Yeah . What I was gonna say is that I don't want to ask people to do something they wouldn't normally do in a meeting . professor d: So who who does this summarization ? postdoc h: Yeah , I 'm thinking that grad g: People in the meeting . grad g: You know , just at at the end of the meeting , before you go , postdoc h:  - huh . phd e: People with radio mikes can go into separate rooms and continue recording without hearing each other . phd b: Well , then you should try them a few weeks later postdoc h: How fascinating . phd b: and They have all these memory experiments about how little you actually retain grad g: And see score them ? phd e: That 's right . phd b: and wasn't phd e: If we do if we collect four different summaries , you know , we 're gonna get all this weird data about how people perceive things differently . professor a: But but again , like the CrossPads , I don't think I would base a lot of stuff on it , professor d: Ru grad g: I d yeah , I don't know how you would do it , though . professor a: because I think I know when I see the the clock coming near the end of the meeting , I 'm like inching towards the door . grad g: Maybe e Is email easier ? postdoc h: Well , I think if grad g: I when you first said do do it , spoken , what I was thinking is , oh then people have to come up postdoc h:   postdoc h: Yeah , I 'd just try Well , however the least intrusive and and quickest way is , and th and closest to the meeting time too , cuz people will start to forget it as soon as they l leave . But , I don't think that they 'll necessarily you 'll you 'll get many people willing to stay . professor a: But , you know , if you get even one postdoc h: w professor d: Well , I think it 's like the note - taking thing , postdoc h: I would s Yeah . professor d: that that y that you can't certainly can't require it or people aren't gonna want to do this . postdoc h: And I 'm also wondering , couldn't that be included in the data sample so that you could increase the num you know , the words that are , recognized by a particular individual ? If you could include the person 's meeting stuff and also the person 's summary stuff , maybe that would be  , phd e: Yeah . postdoc h: Under the same acoustic circumstance , cuz if they just walk next door with their set - up , nothing 's changed , phd e: Right . postdoc h: just phd f: So I have a question about queries , grad g: God , that 's bugging me . phd f: which is , grad g: Can we turn that light off ? postdoc h: You turn phd f:  grad g: If can we turn that just that that let professor d: The fl the fluorescent light is flickering . grad g: Yeah , there 's a phd b: Oh , it is it is like OK . professor a: That and y Too much caffeine and really tired , grad g: Too much caffeine . phd f: the question I had about queries was , so what we 're planning to do is have people look at the summaries and then generate queries ? Are are we gonna try and o grad g: We we 've just been talking , how do we generate queries ? phd f: Yeah . phd f: so , the question I had is is have we given any thought to how we would generate queries automatically given a summary ?  , I think that 's a whole research topic un unto itself , professor d: Mmm . phd f: n phd b: Shouldn't Landay and his group be in charge of figuring out how to do this ? professor d: Yeah . phd b: They 're the expert phd e: Mari ? professor a: Yeah ? phd e: Someone wants to know when you 're getting picked up . Is someone picking you up ? professor a: what 's our schedule ? professor d: Well , you still wanted to talk with Liz . professor a: Let 's see , you and I need dis  , no , we did the Liz talk . professor a: We need to finish this discussion , and you and I need a little time for wrap - up and quad chart . So , grad g: And what ? professor a:  professor d: I 'm at your disposal . professor a: what what 's the plan for this discussion ? We should professor d: I think we should be able to wind up in another half - hour or something , you think ? grad g: At least . professor a: So , I think phd b: It 's interesting that he 's got , like , this discussion free professor d: Well , we still haven't talked about the action items from here and so on . professor d: And professor a: e e why don't you say five - thirty ? I don't phd e: OK , five - thirty . grad g: Well , in answer to " is it Landay 's problem ? " , he doesn't have a student who 's interested right now in doing anything . So I don't think he wants to do information retrieval , query generation , that sort of stuff . professor d: Yeah , well there 's gonna be these student projects that can do some things but it can't be , yeah , very deep . u I I actually think that that , again , just as a bootstrap , if we do have something like summaries , then having the people who are involved in the meetings themselves , who are cooperative and willing to do yet more , come up with with with queries , could at least give give Landay an idea of the kind of things that people might want to know .  , ye Right ? If he doesn't know anything about the area , and the people are talking about and and ,  phd b: But the people will just look at the summaries or the minutes and re and sort of back - generate the queries . phd f: Well , I 'm not sure I 'm not sure that 's a solved problem . phd f: Right ? Of how to how to generate queries from a phd b: How to do this from the summary . phd b: So what you want to h to do is , people who were there , who later see , minutes and s put in summary form , which is not gonna be at the same time as the meeting . phd b: and , like , make up some stuff to which these notes would be an answer , or or a deeper Yeah . phd b: You postdoc h: I 'm also wondering if we could ask the the people a a question which would be " what was the most interesting thing you got out of this meeting ? " Becau - in terms of like informativeness , phd b: That 's a good one . postdoc h: it might be , you know , that the summary would would not in even include what the person thought was the most interesting fact . professor a: But actually I would say that 's a better thing to ask than have them summarize the meeting . postdoc h: Because you get , like , the general structure of important points and what the what the meeting was about . postdoc h: So you get the general structure , the important points of what the meeting was about with the summary . But with the " what 's the most interesting thing you learned ? "  , so the fact that , I know that Transcriber uses Snack is something that I thought was interesting phd b: Going to see the kids . So , you could ge pick up some of the micro items that wouldn't even occur as major headings professor a:   professor c: Are you thinking about just asking one participant or all of them ? grad g: As many are willing to do it . Cuz you 'll get cuz you 'll get very different answers from everybody , right ? professor c: and then Yeah . phd e: So grad g: Well , maybe one thing we could do is for the meetings we 've already done  , I we didn't take minutes and we don't have summaries . professor a: But actually it would be an easy thing to just go around the room and say what was the most interesting thing you learned , grad g: Mmm . postdoc h: And that I think it would pick up the micro - structure , the some some of the little things that would be hidden . professor d: Boy , I I don't know how we get at this postdoc h: That would be interesting . professor c: Yeah , but when you go around the room you might just get the effect that somebody says something grad g: Or want to get up and leave . professor c: and then you go around the room and they say " yeah , me too , I agree . professor c: So phd e: On the other hand people might try and come up with different ones , right ? professor d: Well phd e: They might say " oh , I was gonna say that one but now I have to think of something else " . grad g: Well , you have the other thing , that that they know why we 're doing it . We 'll  , we 'll we 'll be telling them that the reason we 're trying to do this is is to d generate queries in the future , so try to pick things that other people didn't say .  , It seemed The kind of , interest that I had in this thing initially was , that i basically the form that you 're doing something else later , professor a:   So it 's really the imp the the list of what 's important 's in the something else professor a: Right . professor d: in fact if if it was really major , if it 's the thing that really stuck in your head , then you might not need to go back and and and check on it even . So it 's it 's that you 're trying to find You 're you 've now You weren't interested Say I I said " well , I wasn't that much interested in dialogue , I 'm more of an acoustics person " . professor d: But but thr three months from now if for some reason I get really interested in dialogue , and I 'm " well what is what was that part that that that , Mari was saying ? " grad g: Yeah , like Jim Bass says " add a few lines on dialogue in your next perf " professor a:  professor d: Yeah . professor d: And then I 'm trying to fi  , that 's that 's when I look in general when I look things up most , is when it 's something that didn't really stick in my head the first time around and but for some new reason I 'm I 'm I 'm interested in in in the old stuff . professor a: Well , I That 's hard to generate professor d: So , I don't I don't know . phd f: Do we professor a: and and I think that 's half of what i I would use it for . But I also a lot of times  , make you know , think to myself " this is interesting , professor d:   professor a: So , things that I think are interesting , I would be , wanting to do a query about . And also , I like the idea of going around the room , because if somebody else thought something was interesting , I 'd kind of want to know about it and then I 'd want to follow up on it . That that might get at some of what I was I was concerned about , being interested in something later that w  , I didn't consider to be important the first time , which for me is actually the dominant thing , because if I thought it was really important it tends to stick more than if I didn't , but some new task comes along that makes me want to look up . grad g: But But what 's interesting to me may not b have been interesting to you . grad g: Yeah , I I think you can't get at all of it , professor d: Yeah . phd f: The question the question then is h h how much bias do we introduce by you know , introduce by saying , you know , this was important now and , you know , maybe tha something else is important later ? professor d:   But postdoc h: Well , and and one thing , we we 're saying " important " and we 're saying " interesting " . But I I I guess that 's the question , really , is that  , postdoc h:   professor d: W phd f: does building queries based on what 's important now introduce an irreversible bias on being able to do what Morgan wants to do later ? professor d: Well , irreversible . phd f: That 's that 's professor d: I I  , I guess what I what I I keep coming back to in my own mind is that , the soonest we can do it , we need to get up some kind of system postdoc h: Yeah . professor d: so that people who 've been involved in the meeting can go back later , even if it 's a poor system in some ways , and ,  and ask the questions that they actually want to know . If you know , if  , as soon as we can get that going at any kind of level , then I think we 'll have a much better handle on what kind of questions people want to ask than in any anything we do before that . postdoc h: I will say that that I I chose " interesting " because I think it includes also " important " in some cases . postdoc h: Well , and and also i it puts a lot of burden on the person to to evaluate . You know , I think inter " interesting " is is non - threatening in professor a: OK - OK . professor a: In the interest of , grad g: Importance ? postdoc h: Yeah . professor a: No , i in the interest of generating some minutes here , and also moving on to action items and other things , let me just go through the things that I wrote down as being important , that we at least decided on . CrossPads we were going to try , if Landay can get the ,  get them to to you guys , and see if they 're interesting . professor a: getting just , digital pictures a couple digital pictures of the the table and boards to set the context of the meeting .  , and then going around the room at the end to just say qu ask people to mention something interesting that they learned . So rather than say the most interesting thing , something interesting , postdoc h: k professor a: and that way you 'll get more variety . " And then the last thing c would be for those people who are willing to stay afterwards and give an oral summary . professor a: OK ? Does that pretty much cover everything we talked about ? That well , that we want to do ? postdoc h:   grad g: Yeah , that 's like n I think that 's gonna predominantly end up being whoever takes down the equipment then . postdoc h: And and that would also be that the data would be included in the database . phd e: there is still this hope that people might actually think of real queries they really want to ask at some point . phd e: And that if if that ever should happen , then we should try and write them down . grad g: Give them a reward , a dollar a query ? phd e: Yeah , really . So professor d: Well , and again , if we can figure out a way to jimmy a a a a very rough system , say in a year , then  , so that in the second and third years we we actually have something to postdoc h: Yeah .  , the level of the query could be , you know , very low - level or very high - level . And it gets fuzzier and fuzzier as you go up , right ? grad g: Well , we 're gonna phd b: So you need to have some sort of if you start working with queries , some way of identifying what the you know , if this is something that requires a a one - word answer or it 's one place in the recording versus was there general agreement on this issue of all the people who ha phd e:  . phd b: In fact , they 're very meaningful cuz they 're very high - level . phd b: It But it may well grad g: But professor d: Because  , b because it depends on , what our goal is . grad g: Really ? professor d: If our goal is Wizard of Oz - ish , we might want to know what is it that people would really like to know about this data . professor d: And if it 's if if it 's something that we don't know how to do yet , th great , phd e: Yeah . grad g: Yeah , I was thinking about Wizard of Oz , but it requires the wizard to know all about the meetings . phd e: Well just imagine if professor d: But but just phd e: Get people to ask questions that they def the machine definitely can't answer at the moment , professor d: Yeah . w Just " what would you like to know ? " phd e: but grad g: Yep . postdoc h: I I was wondering if if there might be one s more source of queries which is indicator phrases like " action item " , professor a: OK . postdoc h: Yeah , that 's something to be determined , something to be specified , phd b: Well , probably if you have to sit there at the end of a meeting and say one thing you remember , it 's probably whatever action item was assigned to you . phd b: So , in general , that could be something you could say , right ? I 'm supposed to do this . Well , but then you could you could prompt them to say , you know , " other than your action item " , you know , whatever . phd e: Well postdoc h: But but the action item would be a way to get , maybe an additional query . Well , but you know , but you could get again @ @ professor a: Well , we 're piloting . professor a: or maybe we should wait until the summary of this until this meeting is transcribed and then we will hav professor d: We we had  , phd e: Yeah . professor d: somewhere up there we had milestones , but I guess Did y did you get enough milestone , from the description things ? professor a: I got Yeah . In fact , why don't you hand me those transparencies so that I remember to take them . professor d: And , you know , there 's obviously detail behind each of those , as much as is needed . What I have down for action items is we 're supposed to find out about our human subject , requirements . professor a: people are supposed to send me U R for their for web pages , to c and I 'll put together an overall cover . We professor a:  ? phd e: we need to look at our web page professor a: And and you also need to look at your web page phd e: and make one that 's that 's p professor a: and clean it up by mid - July . And so ,  professor a: How about if I just c  , Right now all I want I personally only want text data . I think the only thing Jeff would do anything with right now But I 'm just speaking fr based on a conversation with him two weeks ago I had in Turkey . professor d: Wh postdoc h: You could email to both of us , just  , if you wanted to . postdoc h: I don't think either of us would mind recei professor a: OK . postdoc h: but but in any case I 'd be happy to send you the professor a: And your email is ? professor d: i postdoc h: Edwards at ICSI . professor a: And then professor d: In in our phone call , before , we we ,  It turns out the way we 're gonna send the data is by , And ,  and then what they 're gonna do is take the CD - ROM and transfer it to analog tape and give it to a transcription service , that will grad g: Oh , is this IBM ? professor d: Yeah . postdoc h: Yeah , using foot pedals professor d: Yeah , foot foot pedals postdoc h: and professor d: and grad g: so do they How are they gonna do the multi - channel ? professor d: See , that 's a good question . professor d: probably about like you did , grad g: Mix ? professor d: and then there will be some things you know , many things that don't work out well . And that 'll go back to IBM and they 'll they 'll ,  they run their aligner on it and it kicks out things that don't work well , which you know , the overlaps will certainly be examples of that . professor d: We 'll give them all the the multi - channel stuff grad g: So we 'll give them all sixteen channels professor d: and grad g: and they 'll do whatever they want with it . phd b: But you also should probably give them the mixed You know , equal sound - level professor d: Yeah . professor d: It 's also won't be adding much to the data to give them the mixed . phd f: But w phd b: I phd f: It 's not professor a: Right . phd b: You should that may be all that they want to send off to their transcribers . Related to to the conversation with Picheny , I need to email him , my shipping address and you need to email them something which you already did . I I m emailed them the Transcriber URL , the on - line , data that Adam set up , The URL so they can click on an utterance and hear it . And I was gonna m email them the which I haven't yet , a pointer to to the web pages that we that we currently have , cuz in particular they want to see the one with the the way the recording room is set up postdoc h: Good . grad g: And then p possibly postdoc h: I C - I CC ' ed Morgan . grad g: Not an immediate action item but something we do have to worry about is data formats for for higher - level information . We were gonna grad g: Well , or d or not even higher level , different level , prosody and all that sort of stuff . professor a: That 's postdoc h: Well ,  professor a: W My my u feeling right now on format is you guys have been doing all the work phd e: Well  , yeah . So , what n important thing professor a: but Cuz I 'm not actually touching the data , postdoc h: Well , it c phd e: Right . professor d: So a key thing will be that you we tell you postdoc h: Great . phd f: and " professor d: We also had the ,  that we were s  , that you were gonna get us the eight - hundred number professor a: Oh , yeah . professor d: and we 're all gonna we 're gonna call up your Communicator thing and and we 're gonna be good slash bad , depending on how you define it , users . professor c: Now , something that I mentioned earlier to Mari and Liz is that it 's probably important to get as many non - technical and non - speech people as possible in order to get some realistic users . Cuz we don't want people who already know how to deal with dialogue systems , professor a: Yeah . Or , like if you have a professor c: who know that you shouldn't hyper - articulate , for instance , and things like that . professor a: Or , like if you have somebody who makes your your plane reservations for you , professor c: So . e You know , it could result in some good bloopers , which is always good for presentations . professor d: My mother would have a very interesting conversation with it grad g: He would never use it . So I have the professor d: We talked about that we 're getting the recording equipment running at UW . And so it depends , w e e e they 're you know , they 're p m If that comes together within the next month , there at least will be , major communications between Dan and UW folks phd e: Yeah .  , professor a: I 'm I 'm shooting to try to get it done get it put together by the beginning of August . professor d: as to phd e: we should talk about it , but postdoc h: Mmm . professor a: So , you know , if professor d: But we have it it 's it 's pretty We don't know .  , he he s  , he said that it was sitting in some room collecting dust professor a: We don't know . professor d: and and so we don't know , professor a: i It 's probably unlikely that we 'll pull this off , professor d: i e professor a: but a at least it 's worth trying .  , and I will email these notes  , I 'm not sure what to do about action items for the data stuff , although , then somebody I guess somebody needs to tell Landay that you want the pads . professor d: and he also said something about outside there that came up about the outside text sources , that he he may have grad g:   professor a: Oh ! professor d: some text sources that are close enough to the sort of thing that we can play with them for a language model . phd e: Yeah , that was  , that was What he was saying was this he this thing that , Jason had been working on finds web pages that are thematically related to what you 're talking about . But it 's p it might be phd e: so professor a: But but that 's actually what I wanna do . grad g: Un - unfortunately Landay told me that Jason is not gonna be working on that anymore . He seemed when I asked him if he could actually supply data , he seemed a little bit more reluctant . If I don't get something grad g: Who ? Landay or Jason ? professor a: Landay . professor a: you know , otherwise , if you guys have any papers or I could I could use ,  I could use your web pages . You 've got all the web pages on the Meeting Recor professor d: Yeah , why search for them ? professor a: Yeah ! professor d: They 're we know where they are . professor d: There 's there 's some , Carnegie Mellon stuff , right ? On on meeting recording , grad g: Yep . professor a: So , there 's there 's ICSI , Xerox , professor d: and phd b: And there 's You should l look under , like , intelligent environments , professor d: And Xerox . phd b: smart rooms , grad g: the " Georgia Tech Classroom Two Thousand " is a good one . J There 's th That 's where I thought you would want to eventually be able to have a board or a camera , professor a:   phd b: because of all these classroom grad g: Well , Georgia Tech did a very elaborate instrumented room . I think that 's good enou that 's that 's pretty much all I can think of . postdoc h: Can I ask , one thing ? It relates to data data collection and I and I 'd and we mentioned earlier today , this question of  , so , I s I know that from with the near - field mikes some of the problems that come with overlapping speech , are lessened . But I wonder if  , is that sufficient or should we consider maybe getting some data gathered in such a way that , u w we would c  , p have a meeting with less overlap than would otherwise be the case ? So either by rules of participation , or whatever . postdoc h: Now , you know , it 's true , we were discussing this earlier , that depending on the task so if you 've got someone giving a report you 're not gonna have as much overlap . phd f: Adam ! postdoc h: But , i i  , so we 're gonna have s you know , non - overlapping samples anyway . But , in a meeting which would otherwise be highly overlapping , is the near - field mike enough or should we have some rules of participation for some of our samples to lessen the overlap ? professor d:  . phd e: turn off professor a: I don't think we should have rules of participation , but I think we should try to get a variety of meetings . That 's something that if we get the the meeting stuff going at UW , that I probably can do more than you guys , postdoc h: OK . Just want to be sure there 's enough data to professor a: phd b: They 're still gonna overlap , postdoc h: OK , good . phd b: but Mark and others have said that there 's quite a lot of found data from the discourse community that has this characteristic and also the political Y you know , anything that was televised for a third party has the characteristic of not very much overlap . professor d: Wasn - but w I think we were saying before also that the natural language group here had less overlap . postdoc h: because you know , it is true people can modify the amount of overlap that they do if if they 're asked to . postdoc h: Not not entirely modify it , but lessen it if if it 's desired . But if if that 's sufficient data I just wanted to be sure that we will not be having a lot of data which can't be processed . So I 'm just writing here , we 're not gonna try to specify rules of interaction but we 're gonna try to get more variety by i using different groups of people postdoc h: Time . And I you know , I I know that the near f near - field mikes will take care of also the problems to s to a certain degree . professor a: Cuz if I recorded some administrative meetings then that may have less overlap , because you might have more overlap when you 're doing something technical and disagreeing or whatever . Well , I just as as as a contributary eh , so I I know that in l in legal depositions people are pr are prevented from overlapping . They 'll just say , you know you know , " wait till each person is finished before you say something " . professor a: Well , the reason why I didn't want to is be why I personally didn't want to is because I wanted it to be as , unintrusive as possi postdoc h:   I just want to be sure we don't that we 're able to process , i u  , you know , as much data as we can . Did they discuss any of that in the the meeting they had with L Liberman ? phd b:   professor d: What phd b: And there was a big division , professor d: What what do they phd b: so Liberman and others were interested in a lot of found data . phd b: So there 's lots of recordings that They 're not close - talk mike , professor d: Yeah . phd b: but And and there 's lots of television , you know , stuff on , political debates and things like that , congre congressional hearings .  , and then the CMU folks and I were sort of on the other side in cuz they had collected a lot of meetings that were sort of like this and said that those are nothing like these meetings . And , I guess we just left it as @ @ that if there 's found data that can be transformed for use in speech recognition easily , then of course we would do it , professor d:   Is that is that going to be publicly available , phd b: As far as I know , they h have not . grad g: It 's also it 's not it 's not near - far , right ? phd b: I 'm not sure .  , if people were interested they could talk to them , but I I got the feeling there was some politics involved . grad g: Cuz I had thought they 'd only done far - field , phd b: I think you need to talk to Waibel and grad g: intelligent - room sorts of things . phd b: But they had multiple mikes and they did do recognition , and they did do real conversations . Well , once we send out postdoc h: Yeah , I think professor d: we still haven't sent out the first note saying " hey , this list exists " . But but , once we do that professor a: Is that an action item ? professor d: Yeah . We should at least check that everybody here ? grad g: I think everyone here is on the list . grad g: I I added a few people who didn't who I knew had to be on it even though they didn't tell me . grad g: You are on it , aren't you ? postdoc h: Yeah , I am . So " found data " , they mean like established corpora of linguistics and and other fields , right ? phd b: What they mean is stuff they don't have to fund to collect , postdoc h: It sounds like such a t phd b: and especially good postdoc h: Yeah , OK . It 's things occur without any You know , the pe these people weren't wearing close - talking mikes , but they were recorded anyway , like the congressional hearings and , you know , for legal purposes or whatever . Of course it 's not " found " in the sense that at the time it was collected for the purpose . phd b: But what he means is that You know , Mark was really a fan of getting as much data as possible from you know , reams and reams of stuff , of broadcast stuff , postdoc h: That 's interesting . phd e: We should go around and say something interesting that happened at the meeting ? professor a: Oh . phd b: Rrrh ! grad g: Now , I was already thinking about it , so professor d: Oh ! Good man . phd b: I grad g: So , I really liked the idea of what I thought was interesting was the combination of the CrossPad and the speech . So , can you determine the interesting points by who 's writing ? Can you do special gestures and so on that that have , special meaning to the corpora ? I really liked that . postdoc h: Well , I I just realized there 's another category of interesting things which is that , I I found this discussion very , i this this question of how you get at queries really interesting . And and the and I and the fact that it 's sort of , nebulous , what what that what kind of query it would be because it depends on what your purpose is . So I actually found that whole process of of trying to think of what that would involve to be interesting . I just sort of thought we we went around a nice discussion of the factors involved there , which I thought was worthwhile . grad g: Did you take pictures of the boards ? phd e: Not that I postdoc h: Yeah .  , I will take pictures of them , but postdoc h: That 's a good point . phd f: I 'm gonna pass because I can't  , of the Jane took my answer . But I will say  , I will actually  , a spin on different slightly different spin on what you said , this issue of , realizing that we could take minutes , and that actually may be a goal . So that that may be kind of the test in a sense , test data , the the template of what we want to test against , generating a summary . I think the question of how to generate queries automatically was the most interesting question that came up , and it 's something that , as you said , is a whole research topic in itself , so I don't think we 'll be able to do anything on it because we don't have funding on it , in this project . professor d: Well , being more management lately than than research , I think the thing that impressed me most was the people dynamics and not any of the facts . phd e: How are we gonna find that in the data ? grad g: Well , if we had people wearing the wireless mikes all the time phd e: Oh , yeah . grad g: Yeah , I think phd f: Well , one thing you could search for is were people laughing a lot . phd e: How happy were they ? professor d: I 'd probably search for something like that . postdoc h:  h Do we need do I need to turn something off here , or I do unplug this , or ? professor d: Now these we turn off
grad a: So , I think this is gonna be a pretty short meeting because I have four agenda items , three of them were requested by Jane who is not gonna be at the meeting today . Does anyone besides Jane know what the transcription status is ? phd f: sort of , I do , peripherally . phd c: Is that English ? phd f:  Well first of all with IBM I got a note from Brian yesterday saying that they finally made the tape for the thing that we sent them a week or week and a half ago phd d: That 's our system . grad a: Ugh ! phd f: and that it 's gone out to the transcribers and hopefully next week we 'll have the transcription back from that . grad a: C can I have a pen ? phd f:  Jane seems to be  moving right along on the transcriptions from the ICSI side . phd f: Yeah , so  , I guess she 's hired some new transcribers phd d: Speaking grad e: Which meetings is she transcribing ? phd f: and  well we 've we 've run out of E D Us because a certain number of them are  , sort of awaiting to go to IBM . phd d: So does she have transcribers right now who are basically sitting idle because there 's no data back from IBM grad e: So we 're doing some in parallel . phd d: Because I I need to ask Jane whether it 's it would be OK for her  , s some of her people to transcribe  some of the initial data we got from the SmartKom data collection , which is these short like five or seven minute sessions . phd d:  and we want it You know , we need The Again , we we have a similar  logistic set - up where we are supposed to send the data to Munich grad a: Right . phd d: And so  I wanted to ask Jane if if  , you know , maybe one of their transcribers could could do  since these are very short , that should really be  , professor b:   And it 's One session is only  like seven professor b: So that should have ma many fewer And it 's also not  a bunch of interruptions with people and all that , phd d: Right . And some of it is read speech , so we could give them the the thing that they 're reading professor b: right ? So . phd d: And so  , I guess since she 's I was gonna ask her but since she 's not around I maybe I 'll professor b: Yeah , well it certainly seems phd d:  if if that 's OK with you to to , you know , get that stuff  to ask her for that , then I 'll do that . Yeah , if we 're held up on this other stuff a little bit in order to encompass that , that 's OK because I I  ,  I still have high hopes that the that the IBM pipeline 'll work out for us , so it 's phd d: Yeah . phd f: Oh , yeah , and also related to the transcription stuff , so I 've been trying to keep a web page  up to date f showing what the current status is of the trans of all the things we 've collected and what stage each meeting is in , in terms of whether it 's grad a: Can you mail that out to the list ? phd f:  -  , yeah I will . I That 's the thing that I sent out just to foo people saying can you update these pages grad a: Oh , OK , OK . phd f: and so that 's where I 'm putting it but I 'll I 'll send it out to the list telling people to look at it . So Jane also wanted to talk about participant approval , but I don't really think there 's much to talk about . professor b: You are going to grad a: I 'm gonna send out to the participants , with links to web pages which contain the transcripts and allow them to suggest edits .  phd c: So but it 's just transcripts , not the not the audio ? grad a: Nope , they 'll have access to the audio also . phd f: So ,  the audio that they 're gonna have access to , will that be the uncompressed version ? Or will you have scripts that like uncompress the various pieces and grad a: Oh , that 's a good point . Yeah , it 's it 's probably going to have to be the uncompressed versions because , it takes too long to do random access decompression . Yeah , I was just wondering because we 're  running out of the un - backed - up disk space on grad a: Well , that was the other point . phd f: Oh , was that another one ? grad a: Yep , that 's another agenda item . grad a: So ,  But that is a good point so we 'll get to that , too . I 've added some stuff that  indes indexes by the meeting type MR , EDU , et cetera and also by the user ID .  The back - end is  , going more slowly as I s I think I said before just cuz I 'm not much of a Tcl - TK programmer . So I think Don and I are gonna work on that and and you and I can just talk about it off - line more .  grad e: And , also  , I was just showing Andreas , I got  an X Waves kind of display , and I don't know how much more we can do with it with like the prosodic stuff where we have like stylized pitches and signals and the transcripts on the bottom grad a: Oh , cool . grad e: so , right now it 's just an X Waves and then you have three windows but I don't know , it looked pretty nice and I 'm sure it think it has potential for a little something , grad a: For a demo ? grad e: yeah , for a demo . grad e: So professor b: OK , so again , the issue is For July , the issue 's gonna be what can we fit into a Windows machine , and so on , but grad e: Oh . grad e: Well , we 'll see ,  phd c: I 've been putting together  Transcriber things for Windows so i And I installed it on Dave Gelbart 's PC and it worked just fine . phd d: Really ? So is that Because there 's some people  It would be cool if we could  get that to work  at at SRI phd c: Yeah . phd d: because the  grad a: Well Transcriber is Tcl - TK , very generic with Snack , phd d: we have m m We have more Windows machines to run the phd c: Yeah . Yeah but But the problem is the version Transcriber works with , the Snack version , is one point six whatever and that 's not anymore supported . But I just wrote an email to to the author of to the Snack author and he sent me to one point six whatever library grad a: Well I thought it was packaged with Transcriber ? phd c: and so it works . Yeah , but then you can't add our patches and then the the new version is is totally different grad a: Oh . phd c: and you can't you can't access that so you have to install First install Tcl then install Snack and then install the Transcriber thing and then do the patches . Ugh ! phd d: I I wonder if if we should contribute our changes back to the authors so that they maintain those changes along phd c: Yeah . grad a: We have Yeah b it 's just hasn't made it into the release yet . phd f: So did you  put the  the NT version out on the  Meeting Recorder page ? Or phd c: No , I haven't done that yet . professor b: So , can some of the stuff that Don 's talking about somehow fit into this  , mean you just have a set of numbers that are associated with the grad e: Yeah . phd c: So grad e: Yeah , it 's basically ASCII files or binary files , whatever representation . Just three different It 's a waveform and just a stylized pitch vector basically so it 's phd d: So So Well grad e:  we could do it in Matl -  you could do it in a number of different places I 'm sure . phd d: But But it would be cool if the Transcriber interface had like another window for the you know , maybe above the waveform where it would show some arbitrary valued function that is that is you know time synchron ti ti time synchronous with the wavform . Again it 's it 's It 's more Tcl - T grad e: Yeah . grad a: So someone who 's familiar with Tcl - TK has to do it , phd d: Right . grad a: But it it seems to me that I c phd c: And grad a: It doesn't seem like having that real time is that necessary . grad e:  What do you mean by real time ? Do you mean like phd f: Like being able to scroll through it and stuff for the demo . phd f: Is that what you mean ? grad a: It just seems to me jus grad e: It would be cool to see it phd f: Yeah . grad e: It would be cool like to see to hear it and see it , phd c: And to hear it . grad a: Sure , but I don't think I You can do all that just statically in phd c: Yeah . grad e: I think it would lose Yeah ,  y grad a: Just record the audio clip and show an image and I think that 's grad e: Right , right .  , no , we 're talking about on the computer and and  , I think when we were talking about this before we had littl this little demo meeting , grad e: Right . professor b: we sort of set up a range of different degrees of liveness that you could have and , the more live , the better , but  , given the crunch of time , we may have to retreat from it to some extent . So I think For a lot of reasons , I think it would be very nice to have this Transcriber interface be able to show some other interesting signal along with it phd d:   But ,  Anyway , jus just looking for ways that we could actually show what you 're doing , in to people . professor b: Cuz a lot of this stuff , particularly for Communicator ,  certainly a significant chunk of the things that we waved our arms about th originally had t had to do with prosodics It 'd be nice to show that we can actually get them and see them . So , we have a little bit of time before that becomes critical , but we are like ninety five percent , ninety eight percent on the scratch disks for the expanded meetings . grad a: And , my original intention was like we would just delete them as we needed more space , but unfortunately we 're in the position where we have to deal with all the meeting data all at once , in a lot of different ways . grad a: Yeah , there 're a lot of transcribers , phd c: Yeah . grad a: so all of those need to be expanded , and then people are doing chunking and I want to do  , the permission forms , phd f:   grad a: so I want those to be live , so there 's a lot of data that has to be around . One of the things I was thinking is we we just got these hundred alright , excuse me ten ,  SPARC - Blade SUN - Blades . grad a: And so it seems to me we could hang scratch disk on those because they 'll be in the machine room , they 'll be on the fast connection to the rest of the machines . phd f: Well , is there Why not just hang them off of Abbott , is there a grad a: Because there 's no more room in the disk racks on Abbott . phd f: You can put two phd d: Oh you mean you put them inside the pizza boxes for the grad a: Sure . grad a: So you can just go out and buy a PC hard drive and stick it in . professor b: But if Abbott is going to be our disk server it it file server it seems like we would want to get it , a second disk rack or something . What I 'm looking for is where do we s expand the next meeting ? phd c: Yep . professor b: Well , for the next meeting you might be out of luck with those ten , mightn't you ?  , you know Dave Johnson is gone for , like , ten days , grad a: Oh , I didn't know he had left already . grad e: How much space do you need for these ? professor b: I don't know what his schedule is . phd f: I I thi grad e: I have  I have an eighteen gig drive hanging off of my computer . grad a: Alright ! What 's your computer 's name ? grad e: So  , Samosa . grad a: And you 're o you 're offering ? grad e:  I 'm not doing anything on it right now until I get new meetings to transcri or that are new transcriptions coming in I really can't do anything . grad e:  not that I can't do anything , I jus phd f: I I jus I just gave Thilo some about ten gigs , the last ten gigs of space that there was on on  Abbott .  And  So but that But grad a: Which one was that , X G ? X G ? phd c: XG . phd d: That 's also where we store the The  Hub - five training set waveforms , phd c: Oops . grad a: But that won't be getting any bigger , phd d: right ? phd f: No . grad a: will it ? phd f: I don't think that 's on XG . phd d: But I 've also been storing I 've been storing the feature files there and I guess I can s start deleting some because we now know what the best features are grad e: Well phd d: and we won't be using the old ones anymore . phd d:  Oh thats XA Oh that 's X phd c: Isn't that XH ? phd f: I th grad a: Not not for long . grad e: I have a lot of space and it 's not it 's n There 's very little  Yeah not for long . phd d: Maybe I 'm confu grad e: But  it 's not going f phd d: Oh no I 'm sorry . grad a: Yeah , it 's probably Probably only about four gig is on X on your X drive , phd c: So . grad a: but we 'll definitely take it up if you grad e: I th phd d: I think you 're right . It 's XH and D grad e: I think it 's about four or five gig cuz I have four meetings on there , phd d: The b I 'm also using DG I got that confused . grad a: The " more disk space " button ? professor b: Just press Press each meeting saying " we need more disk space " " this week " . professor b: And And how much does each meeting take ? phd f: And it 's about a gig uncompressed . phd c: It 's It 's a little bit more as I usually don't do not uncompress the all of the PZM and the PDA things . So there 's what thirty some gig of just meetings so far ? professor b: So - so So maybe there 's a hundred gig or something . Well we We haven't uncompressed all the meetings , but grad a: I would like to .  it 's just a question of figuring out where they should be and hanging them , grad a: Yep . professor b: but But  , we could You know , if you want to get four disks , get four disks . Well I sent that message out to , I guess , you and Dave asking for if we could get some disk . phd f: I s I sent this out a a day ago grad a: And put it where ? professor b: Right . phd f: but and Dave didn't respond so I don I don't know how the whole process works .  does he just go out and get them and if it 's OK , and grad a: Yep . And just say an - e just ask him that , you know , wha what should you do . And in my answer back was " are you sure you just want one ? " So  I think that what you want to do is plan ahead a little bit and figure " well , here 's what we pi figure on doing for the next few months " . So this is a question that 's pretty hard to solve without talking to Dave , phd d: Th - The phd f: I think part of the reason why Dave can't get the the new machines up is because he doesn't have room in the machine room right now . phd d: One One On - One thing to in to  t to do when you need to conserve space is phd f: So he has to re - arrange a bunch of stuff . phd d: I bet there are still some old , like , nine gig disks , around and you can probably consolidate them onto larger disks and and you know recover the space . An - and so , he always has a a lot of plans of things that he 's gonna do to make things better in many ways an and runs out of time . And so I think what he 's been concentrating on is  the back the back up system , rather than on new disk . Basically , we can easily get one to four disks ,  you just go out and get four and we 've got the money for it , it 's no big deal .  , but the question is where they go , and I don't think we can solve that here , you just have to ask him . grad a: Yeah , it 's just It 's not on the net , so it 's a little awkward phd d: The only phd f:  . phd d: What do you mean it 's not on the net ? grad a: It 's not phd c: It 's not bad . grad a: It 's behind lots of fire walls that don't allow any services through except S S phd d: Oh because it 's because it 's an ACIRI machine ? grad a: Yep . grad a: And also on the list is to get it into the normal ICSI net , but Who knows when that will happen ? phd d: But that can't be that hard . phd d:  grad a: No , the the problem with that apparently is that they don't currently have a wire running to that back room that goes anywhere near one of the ICSI routers . If there was a person dedicated to doing it they would happen pretty easily but it 's it 's jus every ever everybody everybody has a has grad a: But Dave has to do all of them . But at any rate I think that there 's a there 's a longer term thing and there 's immediate need and I think we need a a conversation with  , maybe maybe after after tea or something you and I can go down and and talk to him about it Just say " wha you know , what should we do right now ? " phd f: How long is David gonna be gone ? professor b: eleven days or something ? grad a: Oh my ! professor b: Yeah basically tomorrow and all of the week after . The only oth thing other thing I was gonna add was that   , I talked briefly to Mari and  we had both been busy with other things so we haven't really connected that much since the last meeting we had here but we agreed that we would have a telephone meeting the Friday after next . And I I I wanted to make it ,  after the next one of these meetings , so something that we wanna do next meeting is is  to put together  , a kind of reasonable list for ourselves of what is it , that we 've done .  just sort of bulletize  o e do do I can I can dream up text but this is basically gonna lead to the annual report . grad a: This is the fifteenth ? So just a week from tomorrow ? professor b: that would grad a: OK . So , we can This So that 's an phd d: Is this gotta be in the morning ? professor b:  phd d: Or Because you know I Fridays I have to leave  like around  two . So if it could be before that would be be professor b: No , no but I I I don't need other folks for the meeting . professor b: Yeah so what I meant was on the me this meeting if I wa something I I I 'm making a major thing in the agenda is I wanna help in getting together a list of what it is that we 've done so I can tell her . professor b: but but   , and then the next day  , late in the day I 'll be having that that discussion with her . phd d:   One thing  we in past meetings we had  also a you know various variously talked about the  work that w  was happening sort of on the on the recognition side professor b:   And I wondered whether we should maybe have  a separate meeting and between you know , whoever 's interested in that because I feel that  there 's plenty of stuff to talk about but it would be sort of  maybe the wrong place to do it in this meeting if  professor b: Think so ? phd d: Well , it 's that It 's just gonna be ver very boring for people who are not you know , sort of really interested in the details of the recognition system . professor b: Well , OK , so how many how many people here would not be interested in  in a meeting about recognition ? phd c: Me too . phd d: Well I know Well , Jane an Well you mean in a separate meeting or ha ha talking about it in this grad a: No . professor b: Real grad e: Watch a ball game ? professor b: Yeah , real real real men " Real men do decoding " or something like that . phd d:  it it 's sort of  when when the talk is about data collection stuff , sometimes I 've you know , I I 'm bored . grad a: The Nod off ? phd d: So it 's I c I can sympathize with them not wanting to i to to be  you know If I cou you know this could professor b: It 's cuz y you have a So you need a better developed feminine side . phd d: I 'm professor b: There 's probably gonna be a lot of " bleeps " in this meeting . You know , whatev or whenever we feel like we phd f: Right , I was Why don't we alternate this meeting every other week ? grad a: Or just alternate the focus . grad a: Oh sor phd f: But I do I don't  a lot of times lately it seems like we don't really have enough for a full meeting on Meeting Recorder . phd f: So if we could alternate the focus of the meeting grad a: Let 's read digits and go . professor b: And then if we find , you know we 're just not getting enough done , there 's all these topics not coming up , then we can expand into another meeting . Let 's chat about it with Liz and Jane when we get a chance , see what they think and phd d:   phd f: and there 's lots of things , you know , details and stuff that would I think people 'd be interested in and I 'd you know , where do we go from here kind of things and So , it would be good . professor b: Yeah , and you 're you 're attending the  the front - end meeting as well as the others so you have you have probably one of the best you and I , I guess are the main ones who sort of see the bridge between the two . phd d:  I jus So the latest result was that   yot I tested the  the sort of final version of the PLP configuration  on development test data for for this year 's Hub - five test set . phd d: And the recognition performance was exactly , and  exactly up to the you know , the first decimal , same as with the  Mel Cepstra front - end .  , well i there was a little bit of a phd f: Oh ! phd d: i overall . phd d: And then the really nice thing was that if if we combine the two systems we get a one and a half percent improvement . phd d: Which u actually uses the whole N - best list from both systems to mmm ,  c combine that . professor b: So except  the only key difference between the two really is the kind of smoothing at the end which is the auto - regressive versus the cepstral truncation . phd d: And , the phd f: But a percent and a half ? grad a: Yeah , it 's pretty impressive . phd f: That 's phd d: And And so  after I told the my  colleagues at SRI about that , you know , now they definitely want to , you know , have a Next time we have an evaluation they want to do  , you know , basically a at least the system combination .  , and , you know , why not ? professor b: Sure , why not ? phd d:  . phd d:  w what do you mean ? More features in the sense of front - end features or in the sense of just bells and whistles ? grad a: No ,  front - end features . Let 's , you know , try RASTA and MSG , and phd d: Oh  Yeah . That 's the the the There 's one thing   you don't want to overdo it because y every front - end You know , if you you know you basically multiply your effort by N , where N is a number of different systems phd f: Oh . So one one compromise would be to only to have the everything up to the point where you generate lattices be basically one system and then after that you rescore your lattices with the multiple systems and combine the results and that 's a fairly painless  thing . phd f: Do you think we 'd still get the one and a half  phd d: I I think so . Maybe a little less because at that point the error rates are lower and so if You know , maybe it 's only one percent or something but that would still be worthwhile doing .  Jus - You know , just wanted to let you know that that 's working out very nicely . phd d: And then we had some results on digits , with  We We So this was  really really sort of just to get Dave going with his  experiments . But as a result , you know , we were sort of wondering why is the Hub - five system doing so well on the digits . phd d: And the reason is basically there 's a whole bunch of read speech data in the Hub - five training set . phd d: And you c And Not all of No it 's actually , digits is only a maybe a fifth of it . professor b: A fifth of it is how much ? phd d: The rest is is read is read TIMIT data and  ATIS data and Wall Street Journal and stuff like that . But a fi a fifth is how much ? phd d: A fifth would be maybe  two hours something . professor b: Yeah , so  that 's actually not that different from the amount of training that there was . phd d: But it definitely helps to have the other read data in there professor b: Oh yeah phd d: because we 're doing professor b: w phd d: You know the error rate is half of what you do if you train only on ti  TIMIT  not TIMIT  TI - digits , professor b:   phd d: That 's e professor b: Because because  , it was apparent if you put in a bunch more data it would be better , phd d: That was e Right , right . So we only for the Hub - five training , we 're only using  a fairly small subset of the Macrophone database . grad a: I could also put in  focus condition zero from Hub - four from Broadcast News , which is mostly prepared speech . So , you know that might be useful for the people who train the the digit recognizers to to use  something other than TI - digits . They they  they experimented for a while with a bunch of different databases with French and Spanish and so forth cuz they 're multilingual tests phd d:   professor b: But but yeah certainly if we ,  If we knew what the structure of what we 're doing there was . professor b: Once we know , then the trainable parts of it it 'd be great to run lots of lots of stuff through . And then I th guess Chuck and I had some discussions about how to proceed with the tandem  system and You wanna You wanna see where that stands ? phd f: Well , I 'm phd d:  phd f: Yeah , so Andreas  brought over the  alignments that the SRI system uses . And so I 'm in the process of  converting those alignments into  label files that we can use to train  a new net with . phd d: An - And one side effect of that would be that it 's  that the phone set would change . So the MLP would be trained on I think only forty - six or forty - eight phd f: Right . phd d:  which is smaller than the  than the phone set that that we 've been using so far . phd d: And that that that will probably help , actually , phd f: So it 's a little different ? phd d: because  the fewer dimensions  e the less trouble probably with the as far as just the  ,  Just You know we want to try things like deltas on the tandem features . And so , you know , fewer dimensions in the phone set would be actually helpful just from a logistics point of view . Although we  , it 's not that many fewer and and and we take a KLT anyway so we could phd d: Right . And then we wanted to s just limit it to maybe  something on the same order of dimensions as we use in a standard  front - end . So that would mean just doing the top I don't know ten or twelve or something of the KLT dimensions . My impression was that when we did that before that had very little  he didn't lose very much . phd d: But then And then something Once we have the new M L P trained up ,  one thing I wanted to try just for the fun of it was to actually run  like a standard hybrid system that is based on you know , those features  and  retrain MLP and also the you know , the dictionary that we use for the Hub - five system . professor b: And the b And the base u starting off with the base of the alignments that you got from i from a pretty decent system . phd d:  because you know , compared to what Eric did a while ago , where he trained up , I think , a system based on Broadcast News and then  tra retraining it on Switchboard or s  and professor b: Yeah . phd d: But he I think he d he didn't he probably didn't use all the training data that was available . We we made some improvements to the dictionary 's  to the dictionary about two years ago which resulted in a  something like a four percent absolute error rate reduction on Switchboard , which professor b: Well the other thing is , dipping deep into history and into  our resource management days , when we were collaborating with SRI before , phd d:   professor b:  it was I think , it is was a really key  starting point for us that we actually got our alignment . professor b: When we were working together we got our initial alignments from Decipher ,  at the time . Later we got away from it because because once we had decent systems going then it was it was typically better to use our own systems phd f: Yeah . professor b: cuz they were self consistent but but certainly to start off when we were trying to recover from our initial hundred and forty percent error  rate . professor b: And we 're not quite that bad with our our Switchboard systems but it was they certainly aren't as good as SRI 's , phd d: OK . phd f: W What is the performance on s the best Switchboard system that we 've done ? Roughly ? professor b: Well , the hybrid system we never got better than about fifty percent error . And  it was I think there 's just a whole lot of things that  no one ever had time for .  we always had a list of a half dozen things that we were gonna do and and a lot of them were pretty simple and we never did . professor b: we never did an never did any adaptation phd d: But that w Even that that number professor b: we never did any phd d: Right . And And that number I think was on Switchboard - one data , right ? Where the error rate now is in the twenties . phd d: So it would be So it would be good t to sort of r re  professor b: Yeah . And the other thing that that would help us to evaluate is to see how well the M L P is trained up . phd d: So it 's sort of a sanity check of the M L P outputs before we go ahead and train up the  you know , use them as a basis for the tandem system . Not phd f: Should we Should we bother with  using the net before doing  embedded training ? professor b: But . phd d: But phd f:  should should we even use that ? phd d: Oh oh that 's a good question . phd f: Or should I just go straight to phd d: Yeah , we we weren't sure whether it 's worth to just use the alignments  from the S R I recognizer or whether to actually go through one or more iterations of embedded training where you realign . You run it ? Keep keep both versions ? See which one 's better ? professor b: yeah . professor b: And while it 's training you may as well test the one you have and see how it did . You know , it 's phd d: But But so I grad a: Sort of given up guessing . phd d: Well but i But in your experience   have you seen big improvements in s on some tasks with embedded training ? Or was it sort of small - ish  improvements that you got professor b:  well . professor b: because we 're coming from  , alignments that were achieved with an extremely different system . grad a: Although ,  we 've done it with When we were combining with the Cambridge recurrent neural net , embedded training made it worse . phd d: So you you started training with outputs from a with alignments that were generated by the Cambridge  system ? grad a: Yep . professor b: Oh ! phd d: No  it 's weird that it did I 'm sorry . Tha - u we we 've see  and wi with the numbers OGI numbers task we 've seen a number of times people doing embedded trainings and things not getting better . phd d: Oh actually it 's not that weird because we have seen We have seen cases where acoustic retraining the acoustic models after some other change made matters worse rather than better . professor b: But I But I would I would suspect that something that that had  a very different  feature set , for instance  they were using pretty diff similar feature sets to us . professor b: I I would expect that something that had a different feature set would would  benefit from phd d:   professor b: sorry , it was the other thing is that what was in common to the Cambridge system and our system is they both were training posteriors . professor b: So  , that 's another pretty big difference grad a: That 's another big difference . professor b: and  , one bac at least Back at phd d: You mean with soft targets ? Or ? Sorry , I 'm sor I missed What What 's the key issue here ? professor b: Oh , that  both the Cambridge system and our system were were training posteriors . And if we 're we 're coming from alignments coming from the SRI system , it 's a likelihood - based system . You know , there 's diffe different front - end different different  , training criterion  , I would think that in a that an embedded  embedded  training would have at least a good shot of improving it some more . I was wondering  you know what size net I should Anybody have any intuitions or suggestions ? professor b: how much training data ? phd f: Well , I was gonna start off with the small train set . professor b: And how How many hours is that ? phd f: That 's why I was I I 'm not sure how much that is . phd d: I think that has about Well i you 'd would be gender - dependent training , right ? So So I think it 's  that 's about mmm , something like thirty hours . phd f: In the small training set ? grad a: Hello ? phd d: I I think so . I 'll grad a: Excuse me ? phd d: It 's definitely less than a hundred grad a: Alright . It 's it 's th the thing I 'll I 'll think about it a little more phd d:   It 's m It 's more than phd f: And a thousand is too small ? professor b: Oh let me think about it , but I think that that  th at some point there 's diminishing returns . professor b: but it but but there is diminishing returns and you 're doubling the amount of time . phd d: Remember you 'll have a smaller output layer so there 's gonna be fewer parameters there . phd d: And then professor b: Fifty s Fifty four to forty eight ? grad a: Vast majority is from the input unit . grad a: Right , because you used the context windows and so the input to hidden is much , much larger . professor b: Yeah , so it 's it 'd be way , way less than ten percent of the difference . What am I trying to think of ? phd f: The The net that that we did use already  was eight thousand hidden units and that 's the one that Eric trained up . professor b: So , yeah definitely not the one thousand  two thousand fr  the four thousand will be better and the two thousand will be almost will be faster and almost as good .  a four thousand is well within the range that you could benefit from but the two thousand 'd be faster so phd d: Right
phd a: Why is it so cold in here ? professor b: so , we haven't sent around the agenda . So , i  , any agenda items anybody has , wants to talk about , what 's going on ? postdoc g: I c I could talk about the meeting .  phd a: Well , I had a just a quick question but I know there was discussion of it at a previous meeting that I missed , but just about the the wish list item of getting good quality close - talking mikes on every speaker . professor b: OK , so let 's let 's So let 's just do agenda building right now . You were gonna starting to say something ? postdoc g: Well , you you , already know about the meeting that 's coming up and I don't know if if this is appropriate for this . phd e: What meeting ? professor b: We can so we can ta so n NIST is NIST folks are coming by next week postdoc g: OK . professor b: I think phd e: Who 's coming ? professor b: John Fiscus postdoc g: An - anything else , strike anybody ? phd a: we started running recognition on one conversation but it 's the r isn't working yet . phd e: Wha phd a: the main thing would be if anyone has , knowledge about ways to , post - process the wave forms that would give us better recognition , that would be helpful to know about . professor b: Yeah , so ,  phd e: What about , is there anything new with the speech , nonspeech stuff ? phd c: Yeah , we 're working more on it but , it 's not finished . postdoc g: I had thought under my topic that I would mention the , four items that I I , put out for being on the agenda f on that meeting , which includes like the pre - segmentation and the and the developments in multitrans . professor b: Alright , why don't we start off with this , u u I guess the order we brought them up seems fine . So the one issue was that the the , lapel mike , isn't as good as you would like . Right ? phd a: Ri -  , professor b: Is that is that basically the point ? phd a: yeah , the And actually in addition to that , that the the close talking mikes are worn in such a way as to best capture the signal . And the reason here is just that for the people doing work not on microphones but on sort of like dialogue and so forth ,  or and even on prosody , which Don is gonna be working on soon , it adds this extra , you know , vari variable for each speaker to to deal with when the microphones aren't similar . phd a: So And I also talked to Mari this morning and she also had a strong preference for doing that . And in fact she said that that 's useful for them to know in starting to collect their data too . Right , so one th grad h: Well , so professor b: well one thing I was gonna say was that , i we could get more , of the head mounted microphones even beyond the number of radio channels we have because I think whether it 's radio or wire is probably second - order . grad h: So it 's towards the corner of your mouth so that breath sounds don't get on it . grad h: And then just sort of about , a thumb or a thumb and a half away from your from your mouth . phd a: But we have more than one type of professor b: How am I d phd a: for instance , you 're phd c: Yeah . phd a: But if we could actually standardize , you know , the the microphones , as much as possible that would be really helpful . professor b: Well ,  it doesn't hurt to have a few extra microphones around , phd d: Yeah . professor b: so why don't we just go out and and get an order of of if this microphone seems OK to people , I 'd just get a half dozen of these things . grad h: Well the onl the only problem with that is right now , some of the Jimlets aren't working . grad h: And so , w  , I 've only been able to find three jacks that are working . phd e: Can we get these , wireless ? grad h: So professor b: No , but my point is phd a: But y we could just record these signals separately and time align them with the start of the meeting . professor b: R r right grad h: I I 'm not sure I 'm follow . Say that again ? professor b: Right now , we 've got , two microphones in the room , that are not quote - unquote standard . professor b: Also what we 've talked before about getting another , radio , grad h: Right . professor b: So ,  so we should go out to our full complement of whatever we can do , but have them all be the same mike . I think the original reason that it was done the other way was because , it w it was sort of an experimental thing and I don't think anybody knew whether people would rather have more variety or or , more uniformity , phd a: Right . phd a: Well , for short term research it 's just there 's just so much effort that would have to be done up front n  , professor b: Yeah . phd e: Is it because You you 're saying the for dialogue purposes , so that means that the transcribers are having trouble with those mikes ? Is that what you mean ? phd a: Well Jane would know more about the transcribers . postdoc g: a couple times , so , yeah , the transcribers notice And in fact there 're some where ,  ugh well ,  there 's it 's the double thing . postdoc g: And he 's always they always they just rave about how wonderful Adam 's Adam 's channel is .  , " Baaah ! " phd a: Even if if you 're talking on someone else 's mike it 's still you w postdoc g: Yeah , but  it 's not just that , it 's also you know you professor b: Yeah . postdoc g: It 's also like n no breathing , no You know , it 's like it 's it 's  , professor b: Yeah . postdoc g: it 's really it makes a big difference from the transcribers ' point of view grad h: Yeah , it 's an advantage when you don't breath . professor b: When we 're doing grad h: Yeah , I think that the point of doing the close talking mike is to get a good quality signal . professor b: Yeah , probably yeah , to the store we talked about and that grad h: Yep . postdoc g: And there was some talk about , maybe the h headphones that are uncomfortable for people , to grad h: Yep . So , as as I said , we 'll do a field trip and see if we can get all of the same mike that 's more comfortable than than these things , which I think are horrible . grad h: And , you know , we 're researchers , so we all have big heads . OK , so , Jonathan Fiscus is coming on the second of February and I 've spoken with , u u a lot of people here , not everyone .  , and , he expressed an interest in seeing the room and in , seeing a demonstration of the modified multitrans , which I 'll mention in a second , and also , he was interested in the pre - segmentation and then he 's also interested in the transcription conventions . postdoc g: And ,  So , it seems to me in terms of like , i i it wou You know , OK . So the room , it 's things like the audio and c and audi audio and acoustic acoustic properties of the room and how it how the recordings are done , and that kind of thing . OK , in terms of the multi - trans , well that that 's being modified by Dave Gelbart to , handle multi - channel recording . grad h: Oh , I should 've I was just thinking I should have invited him to this meeting . I I , @ @ didn't didn't see it , yesterday but I 'm going to see it today . And , that 's that will enable us to do nice  , tight time marking of the beginning and ending of overlapping segments . In terms of , like , pre - segmentation , that that continues to be , a terrific asset to the to the transcribers . What what I 'm doing right now is I 'm trying to include some information about which channel , there 's some speech in . I 'm just trying to do this by comparing energies ,  normalizing energies and comparing energies of the different channels . phd c: And so to to give the transcribers some information in which channel there 's there 's speech in addition to to the thing we we did now which is just , speech - nonspeech detection on the mixed file . So I 'm I 'm relying on on the segmentation of the mixed file postdoc g: This is good . phd c: but I 'm I 'm trying to subdivide the speech portions into different portions if there is some activity in in different channels . postdoc g: Excellent , so this 'd be like w e providing also speaker ID potentially . professor b: something I guess I didn't put in the list but , on that , same day later on in or maybe it 's No , actually it 's this week , Dave Gelbart and I will be , visiting with John Canny who i you know , is a CS professor , postdoc g: Oh . You know , maybe they 'd wanna stick an array mike here when we 're doing things phd e: That would be cool . professor b: or or maybe it 's it 's not a specific array microphone they want phd d: Yeah . professor b: but they might wanna just , you know , you could imagine them taking the four signals from these these table mikes and trying to do something with them  , I also had a discussion So , w  , we 'll be over over there talking with him , after class on Friday . I had a , discussion today with , Birger Kollmeier who 's a , a German , scientist who 's got a fair sized group doing a range of things . But but , he does stuff with auditory models and he 's very interested in directionality , and location , and and , head models and microphone things . And so , he 's he and possibly a student , there w there 's , a student of his who gave a talk here last year , may come here , in the fall for , sort of a five month , sabbatical . phd e: That that reminds me , I had a a thought of an interesting project that somebody could try to do with the data from here , either using , you know , the the mikes on the table or using signal energies from the head worn mikes , phd d:   phd e: and that is to try to construct a map of where people were sitting , professor b: Right . phd e: And so you could plot out who was sitting next to who professor b: A little bit , phd e: and professor b: he didn't do a very extreme thing but just it was just sort of phd d: Yeah , yeah . professor b: e e given that , the the the block of wood with the the the two mikes on either side , grad h:   professor b: if I 'm speaking , or if you 're speaking , or someone over there is speaking , it if you look at cross - correlation functions , you end up with a phd d: Yeah . professor b: if if someone who was on the axis between the two is talking , then you you get a big peak there . And if if someone 's talking on on on , one side or the other , it goes the other way . professor b: And then , it it it even looks different if th t if the two two people on either side are talking than if one in the middle . Well I was just thinking , you know , as I was sitting here next to Thilo that  , when he 's talking , my mike probably picks it up better than your guys 's mikes . phd e: So if you just looked at grad h: Oh , that 's another cl cue , phd d: Yeah . phd e: yeah , looked at the energy on my mike and you could get an idea about who 's closest to who . professor b: Yeah , well you have to the appropriate normalizations are tricky , and and and are probably the key . phd a: You just search for Adam 's voice on each individual microphone , you pretty much know where everybody 's sitting . postdoc g: Can I ask one thing ?  , so , Jonathan Fiscus expressed an interest in , microphone arrays . postdoc g: is there  b And I also want to say , his he can't stay all day . He needs to  , leave for  , from here to make a two forty - five flight grad h: Oh , so just morning . postdoc g: So it makes the scheduling a little bit tight but do you think that ,  that , i John Canny should be involved in this somehow or not . professor b: Probably not but I I 'll I 'll I 'll know better after I see him this Friday what what kind of level he wants to get involved . professor b: he might be excited to and it might be very appropriate for him to , or he might have no interest whatsoever . grad h: Is he involved in Ach ! I 'm blanking on the name of the project . NIST has has done a big meeting room instrumented meeting room with video and microphone arrays , and very elaborate software . Is is he the one working on that ? professor b: Well that 's what they 're starting up . professor b: well I think they 've instrumented a room but I don't think they they haven't started recordings yet . They don't have the phd e: Are they going to do video as well ? grad h:  . grad h: Oh , cuz what what I had read was , they had a  very large amount of software infrastructure for coordinating all this , both in terms of recording and also live room where you 're interacting the participants are interacting with the computer , and with the video , and lots of other stuff . professor b: All all I know is that they 've been talking to me about a project that they 're going to start up recording people meet in meetings . professor b: And one one notable difference u u actually I can't remember whether they were going to routinely collect video or not , but one one , difference from the audio side was that they are interested in using array mikes . The reason I didn't go for that here was because , the focus , both of my interest and of Adam 's interest was  , in impromptu situations . And we 're not recording a bunch of impromptu situations but that 's because it 's different to get data for research than to actually apply it . professor b: And so , for scientific reasons we thought it was good to instrument this room as we wanted it . But the thing we ultimately wanted to aim at was a situation where you were talking with , one or more other people i  , in in an p impromptu way , where you didn't didn't actually know what the situation was going to be . And therefore it would not it 'd be highly unlikely that room would be outfitted with with some very carefully designed array of microphones . It was just , you know , yet another piece of research and it seemed like we had enough troubles just phd e: So there 's no like portable array of mikes ? professor b: No . So there 's there 's  , there 's a whole range of things there 's a whole array of things , that people do on this . professor b: So , the ,  the big arrays , places , like  , Rutgers , and Brown , and other other places , they have , big arrays with , I don't know , a hundred hundred mikes or something . professor b: And it 's and , in fact at one point we had a a proposal in with Rutgers where we were gonna do some of the sort of per channel signal - processing and they were gonna do the multi - channel stuff , but it d it d we ended up not doing it . grad h: And then they have little ones too professor b: And then they had the little ones , yeah . grad h: but  but they don't have our block of wood , right ? professor b: Yeah , our block of wood is unique . professor b: But the But the No , there are these commercial things now you can buy that have four mikes or something phd a:   professor b: and and ,  So , yeah , there 's there 's there 's a range of things that people do . professor b: so if we connected up with somebody who was interested in doing that sort of thing that 's that 's a good thing to do .  , whenever I 've described this to other people who are interested on the with the acoustic side that 's invariably the question they ask . Just like someone who is interested in the general dialogue thing will always ask "  , are you recording video ? " phd a: Right , professor b: right ? phd a: right . professor b: And and the acoustic people will always say , " well are you doing , array microphones ? " So it 's it 's a good thing to do , but it doesn't solve the problem of how do you solve things when there 's one mike or at best two mikes in in this imagined PDA that we have .  , I know that having an array of  , I would imagine it would be more expensive to have a an array of microphones . But couldn't you kind of approximate the natural sis situation by just shutting off  , channels when you 're later on ?  , it seems like if the microphones don't effect each other then couldn't you just , you know , record them with an array and then just not use all the data ? grad h: It 's it 's just a lot of infrastructure that for our particular purpose we felt we didn't need to set up . professor b: Yeah , if ninety - nine percent of what you 're doing is c is shutting off most of the mikes , then going through the postdoc g: OK . professor b: But if you get somebody who 's who who has that as a primary interest then that put then that drives it in that direction . grad h: That 's right ,  if someone if someone came in and said we really want to do it , phd a: Right . That would be fine , phd e: So to save that data you You have to have one channel recording per mike in the array ? grad h: Buy more disk space . professor b: But then , you know , there 's it there 's phd e: What you save , if you 're going to do research with it . yeah professor b: There 's I I don't know what they 're going to do and I don't know how big their array is . Obviously if you were gonna save all of those channels for later research you 'd use up a lot of space . grad h: Well their software infrastructure had a very elaborate design for plugging in filters , and mixers , and all sorts of processing . But I think in practical situations you would have some engine of some sort doing some processing to reduce this to some to the equivalent of a single microphone that was very directional . professor b: Right ? phd a: it seems professor b: So phd e: Sort of saving the result of the beam - forming . phd a: it seems to me that there 's you know , there are good political reasons for for doing this , just getting the data , because there 's a number of sites like right now SRI is probably gonna invest a lot of internal funding into recording meetings also , which is good , but they 'll be recording with video and they 'll be You know , it 'd be nice if we can have at least , make use of the data that we 're recording as we go since it 's sort of this is the first site that has really collected these really impromptu meetings , and just have this other information available . So , if we can get the investment in just for the infra infrastructure and then , I don't know , save it out or have whoever 's interested save that data out , transfer it there , it 'd be g it 'd be good to have have the recording . grad h: You mean to to actually get a microphone array and do that ? phd a: Well , if Even if we 're not grad h: And video and phd a: I 'm not sure about video . That 's sort of an video has a little different nature since right n right now we 're all being recorded but we 're not being taped .  , but it definitely in the case of microphone arrays , since if there was a community interested in this , then grad h: Well , but I think we need a researcher here who 's interested in it . professor b: See the problem is it it took , it took at least six months for Dan to get together the hardware and the software , and debug stuff in in the microphones , and in the boxes . And so I think we could get a microphone array in here pretty easily and , have it mixed to to one channel of some sort . professor b: But , e I think for  , how we 're gonna decide For for maximum flexibility later you really don't want to end up with just one channel that 's pointed in the direction of the the the p the person with the maximum energy or something like that .  , you you want actually to you want actually to have multiple channels being recorded so that you can And to do that , it we 're going to end up greatly increasing the disk space that we use up , we also only have boards that will take up to sixteen channels and in this meeting , we 've got eight people and and six mikes . phd a: Well if there 's a way to say time to sort of solve each of these f those professor b: Yeah . phd a: So suppose you can get an array in because there 's some person at Berkeley who 's interested and has some equipment , and suppose we can as we save it we can , you know , transfer it off to some other place that that holds this this data , who 's interested , and even if ICSI it itself isn't .  , and it it seems like as long as we can time align the beginning , do we need to mix it with the rest ? I don't know . phd a:  it 's just it 's worth considering as sort of grad h: And y it 'd certainly gets skew . phd a: once you make the up front investment and can sort of save it out each time , and and not have to worry about the disk space factor , then it mi it might be worth having the data . I mentioned that , b as a practical matter , grad h: Just professor b: but the real issue is that , there is no way to do a recording extended to what we have now with low skew . professor b: which would mean that the sampling times and so forth would be all over the place compared to this . So it would depend on the level of pr processing you were doing later , but if you 're d i the kind of person who 's doing array processing you actually care about funny little times . And and so you actually wou would want to have a completely different set up than we have , phd a: I see . But what we could do is if there was someone else who 's interested they could have a separate set up which they wouldn't be trying to synch with ours which might be useful for for them . phd a: Right ,  at least they 'd have the data and the transcripts , professor b: And then we can offer up the room , phd a: and Right . professor b: Yeah , we can o offer the meetings , and the physical space , and and yeah , the transcripts , and so on . phd a: But it 's if it 's impossible or if it 's a lot of effort then you have to just balance the two , professor b: Well I thi phd a: so professor b: yeah , the thing will be , u u in in again , in talking to these other people to see what you know , what what we can do . phd e: Is there an interest in getting video recordings for these meetings ?  professor b: Right , so we have we phd e:  grad h: Yes , absolutely . But it 's exactly the same problem , that you have an infrastructure problem , you have a problem with people not wanting to be video taped , and you have the problem that no one who 's currently involved in the project is really hot to do it . Internally , but I know there is interest from other places that are interested in looking at meeting data and having the video . So it 's just postdoc g: Yeah , w although I m I I have to u u mention the human subjects problems , that i increase with video . There 's the fact that then  , if i I I 've heard comments about this before , " why don't you just put on a video camera ? " But you know , it 's sort of like saying , "  , well we 're primarily interested in in some dialogue things , but , why don't we just throw a microphone out there . "  , the thing is , once you actually have serious interest in any of these things then you actually have to put a lot of effort in . professor b: So I think NIST or LDC , or somebody like that I think is much better shape to do all that . postdoc g: I it it occurred to me , has Don signed a human subject 's form ? grad h: Oh ! Probably not . postdoc g: A permission form ? grad h: Has Don have you s did you si I thought you did actually . grad h: Didn't you read a digit string ? phd e: You were here at a meeting before . postdoc g: Did you sign a form ? grad f: Did I ? I don't know . professor b: Yeah , we we postdoc g: But I just grad f: Can I verbally consent ? postdoc g: you know . You 're on recor you 're being recorded postdoc g: o grad f: Yeah . phd a: and professor b: we don't we don't perform electro - shock during these meetings , grad f: I don't care . phd e: How big is the data set ? postdoc g: Oh , it 's what  is one meeting . I didn't want to have any conflicts of , you know , of of when to stop transcribing this one or So I wanted to keep it clear whose data were whose , and and and so phd e:  - huh . postdoc g: And , meetings , you know , I think that they 're they go as long as a almost two hours in some in some cases . So , you know , that means you know , if we 've got two already finished and they 're working on  , right now all eight of them have differe  , additional data sets . postdoc g: And , also Dan Ellis 's innovation of the ,  the multi - channel to here really helped a r a lot in terms of clearing clearing up h hearings that involve overlaps . But , just out of curiosity I asked one of them how long it was taking her , one of these two who has already finished her data set .  , these still , when they 're finished , that means that they 're finished with their pass through . They still need to be edited and all but But it 's word level , speaker change , the things that were mentioned . OK , now I wanted to mention the , teleconference I had with , Jonathan Fiscus . postdoc g: He , he in indicated to me that they 've that he 's been , looking , spending a lot of time with I 'm not quite sure the connection , but spending a lot of time with the ATLAS system . But it looks to me like that 's the name that has developed for the system that Bird and Liberman developed for the annotated graphs approach . postdoc g: So what he wants me to do and what we what we will do and  , is to provide them with the u already transcribed meeting for him to be able to experiment with in this ATLAS System . And they do have some sort of software , at least that 's my impression , related to ATLAS and that he wants to experiment with taking our data and putting them in that format , and see how that works out . I I I explained to him in in detail the , conventions that we 're using here in this in this word level transcript . And , you know , I I explained , you know , the reasons that that we were not coding more elaborately and and the focus on reliability . He 's he 's very  , independently he asked , " well what about reliability ? " So , he 's interested in the consistency of the encoding and that sort of thing . OK ,  phd a: Sorry , can you explain what the ATLAS I 'm not familiar with this ATLAS system . postdoc g: Well , you know , at this point I think  , well Adam 's read more in more detail than I have on this . But , there there is a way of viewing  , whenever you have coding categories , and you 're dealing with  , a taxonomy , then you can have branches that that have alternative , choices that you could use for each each of them . grad h: Is is Is ATLAS the his annotated transcription graph stuff ? I don't remember the acronym . The the one the what I think you 're referring to , they they have this concept of an an annotated transcription graph representation . grad h: And that 's basically what I based the format that I did I based it on their work almost directly , in combination with the TEI stuff . And so it 's it 's a data representation and a set of tools for manipulating transcription graphs of various types . phd e: Is this the project that 's sort of , between , NIST and and , a couple of other places ? postdoc g:   And I looked through them and they mainly had to do with this , this , tree structure , annotated tree diagram thing . postdoc g: So ,  and , you know , in terms of like the conventions that I 'm a that I 've adopted , it there there 's no conflict at all . And , " oh , and how 'd you handle this ? " And I said , " well , you know , this way " and And and we had a really nice conversation .  , OK , now I also wanted to say in a different a different direction is , Brian Kingsbury . I told him he could SSH on and use multi - trans , and have a look at the already done , transcription . And what he said was that , what they 'll be providing is will not be as fine grained in terms of the time information . And , that 's ,  You know , I need to get back to him and and , you know , explore that a little bit more and see what they 'll be giving us in specific , phd a:  . phd e: The p the people postdoc g: but I just haven't had time yet . phd e: The the folks that they 're , subcontracting out the transcription to , are they like court reporters postdoc g: Sorry , what ? Yes . phd e: or postdoc g: Apparently Well , I get the sense they 're kind of like that . Like it 's like a pool of of somewhat  , secretarial I don't think that they 're court reporters . Like medical transcriptionist type people grad h: Nu - it 's mostly it 's for their speech recognition products , phd e: But aren't they 're postdoc g: Yep . grad h: Well they they do send it out but my understanding is that that 's all this company does is transcriptions for IBM for their speech product . grad h: So most of it 's ViaVoice , people reading their training material for that . postdoc g: Up to now it 's been monologues , as far my understood . postdoc g: Brian himself downloaded So So , Adam sent them a CD and Brian himself downloaded  , cuz , you know , we wanted to have it so that they were in familiar f terms with what they wanted to do . postdoc g: And then what he 's going to do is check it , a before they go be beyond the first one . professor b: So if they hear something off in the distance they don't they just go phd e: OK . grad h: Well , but that 's OK , because , you know , you 'll do all them and then combine them . phd e: Well if you 're tran if you got that channel right there postdoc g: d  , in my case phd c: Yeah . postdoc g: Yeah , I I would think that it would be kind of hard to come out with Yeah . phd a: I I think it 's sort of hard just playing the you know , just having played the individual files . phd a: there are a lot of words that are so reduced phonetically that make sense when you know what the person was saying before . phd e: Yeah , that 's phd a: it sort of depends where you are in postdoc g: And especially since a lot of these phd d: Yeah . grad h: And the answer is we don't actually know the answer because we haven't tried both ways . postdoc g: Well , except I can say that my transcribers use the mixed signal mostly grad h: So . postdoc g: unless there 's a huge disparity in terms of the volume on on the mix . In which case , you know , they they wouldn't be able to catch anything except the prominent channel , grad h: Right . postdoc g: Yeah , well phd a: Actually , are th so are they giving any time markings ? grad h: Right . phd a: In other words , if postdoc g: Well , I have to ask him . postdoc g: But but the ,  I did want to say that it 's hard to follow one channel of a conversation even if you know the people , and if you 're dealing furthermore with highly abstract network concepts you 've never heard of So , you know , one of these people was was transcribing the , networks group talk and she said , " I don't really know what a lot of these abbreviations are , " " but I just put them in parentheses cuz that 's the that 's the convention and I just " Cuz you know , if you don't know grad h: Oh , I 'd be curious to to look at that . grad h: The networks group meetings are all phd e: Given all of the effort that is going on here in transcribing why do we have I B M doing it ? Why not just do it all ourselves ? professor b: it 's historical .  , some point ago we thought that  , it " boy , we 'd really have to ramp up to do that " , phd c:  - huh . phd d: No , just professor b: you know , like we just did , and , here 's , a a , collaborating institution that 's volunteered to do it . professor b: And it still might be a good thing phd e: I 'm just wondering now phd a: Actu yeah , Mar - Mari asked me the same question as sort of professor b: but phd e: Well , I 'm I 'm wondering now if it 's grad h: Well we can talk about more details later . Let 's see what comes out of it , and and , you know , have some more discussions with them . It 's very a real benefit having Brian involved because of his knowledge of what the how the data need to be used and so what 's useful to have in the format . grad h: So , Liz , with with the SRI recognizer , can it make use of some time marks ? phd a: OK , so this is a , grad h: I I guess I don't know what that means . phd a: and actually I should say this is what Don has b  , he 's already been really helpful in , chopping up these So so first of all you  , for the SRI front - end , we really need to chop things up into pieces that are f not too huge .  , but second of all ,  in general because some of these channels , I 'd say , like , I don't know , at least half of them probably on average are g are ha are have a lot of cross - ta sorry , some of the segments have a lot of cross - talk .  , it 's good to get sort of short segments if you 're gonna do recognition , especially forced alignment . So , Don has been taking a first stab actually using Jane 's first the fir the meeting that Jane transcribed which we did have some problems with , and Thilo , I think told me why this was , but that people were switching microphones around in the very beginning , so the SRI re phd c: No , th Yeah . They they were not switching them but what they were they were adjusting them , phd a: and they They were not phd c: so . phd a: So we have to sort of normalize the front - end and so forth , and have these small segments . phd a: So we 've taken that and chopped it into pieces based always on your your , cuts that you made on the mixed signal . Right ? phd a: the problem is if we have no time marks , then for forced alignment we actually don't know where you know , in the signal the transcriber heard that word . And so grad h: Oh , I see , phd a: if if it 's a whole conversation and we get a long , you know , par paragraph of of talk , grad h: it 's for the length . phd a: And , I think with phd e: Well you would need to like a forced alignment before you did the chopping , right ? phd a: No , we used the fact that So when Jane transcribes them the way she has transcribers doing this , whether it 's with the pre - segmentation or not , grad h: It 's already chunked . And maybe they choose the chunk or now they use a pre - segmentation and then correct it if necessary . That 's great , cuz the recognizer can grad h: it 's all pretty good sized for the recognizer also . phd a: Right , and it it helps that it 's made based on sort of heuristics and human ear I think . phd a: Th - but there 's going to be a real problem , even if we chop up based on speech silence these , the transcripts from I B M , we don't actually know where the words were , which segment they belonged to . phd e: Why not do a a a forced alignment ? grad h: That 's what she 's saying , is that you can't . phd a: If you do a forced alignment on something really grad h: Got  six sixty minutes of phd a: well even if you do it on something really long you need to know you can always chop it up but you need to have a reference of which words went with which , chop . postdoc g: Now wasn't I thought that one of the proposals was that IBM was going to do an initial forced alignment , phd a: So postdoc g: after they grad h: Yeah , but professor b: I I think that they are , grad h: We 'll have to talk to Brian . professor b: yeah , I 'm sure they will and so we we have to have a dialogue with them about it . professor b: it sounds like Liz has some concerns phd a: Maybe they have some you know , maybe actually there is some , even if they 're not fine grained , maybe the transcribers professor b: and phd a: I don't know , maybe it 's saved out in pieces or or something . postdoc g: I just you know , it 's like I got over - taxed with the timing . But the it is true that the segments I haven't tried the segments that Thilo gave you but the segments that in your first meeting are great . phd a: Right , cuz postdoc g: Well , I I was thinking it would be fun to to  , if if you wouldn't mind , to give us a pre - segmentation . postdoc g: maybe you have one already of that first m of the meeting that  , the first transcribed meeting , the one that I transcribed . phd c: I 'm sure I have some postdoc g: Do you have a could you generate a pre - segmentation ? grad h: February sixteenth I think . phd c: but but that 's the one where we 're , trai training on , so that 's a little bit grad h: Oh . phd c: It 's a little bit at odd to postdoc g: Oh , darn . phd a: And actually as you get transcripts just , for new meetings , we can try postdoc g:  - huh . So it 'd be good for just to know as transcriptions are coming through the pipeline from the transcribers , just to sort of we 're playing around with sort of  , parameters f on the recognizer , postdoc g:   phd a: The first meeting had I think just four people , phd c: Four speakers , yeah . postdoc g: Yeah , Liz and I spoke d w at some length on Tuesday and and I and I was planning to do just a a preliminary look over of the two that are finished and then give them to you . I guess the other thing , I I can't remember if we discussed this in the meeting but , I know you and I talked about this a little bit , there was an issue of , suppose we get in the , I guess it 's enviable position although maybe it 's just saying where the weak link is in the chain , where we we , we have all the data transcribed and we have these transcribers and we were we 're the we 're still a bit slow on feeding at that point we 've caught up and the the the , the weak link is is recording meetings . OK , two questions come , is you know what how how do we  , it 's not really a problem at the moment cuz we haven't reached that point but how do we step out the recorded meetings ? And the other one is , is there some good use that we can make of the transcribers to do other things ? So , I I can't remember how much we talked about this in this meeting but there was grad h: We had spoken with them about it . postdoc g: And there is one use that that also we discussed which was when , Dave finishes the and maybe it 's already finished the the modification to multi - trans which will allow fine grained encoding of overlaps .  , then it would be very these people would be very good to shift over to finer grain encoding of overlaps . It 's just a matter of , you know , providing So if right now you have two overlapping segments in the same time bin , well with with the improvement in the database in in the , sorry , in the interface , it 'd be possible to , you know , just do a click and drag thing , and get the  , the specific place of each of those , the time tag associated with the beginning and end of of each segment . professor b: One one was  , we had s had some discussion in the past about some very high level labelings , postdoc g: Yeah . The types of overlaps professor b: types of overlaps , and so forth that that someone could do . And the third one is is , just a completely wild hair brained idea that I have which is that , if ,  if we have time and people are able to do it , to take some subset of the data and do some very fine grained analysis of the speech . For instance , marking in some overlapping potentially overlapping fashion , the value of , ar articulatory features . professor b: You know , just sort of say , OK , it 's voiced from here to here , there 's it 's nasal from here to here , and so forth .  , as opposed to doing phonetic  , you know , phonemic and the phonetic analysis , grad h:  professor b: and , assuming , articulatory feature values for those those things . postdoc g: Also if you 're dealing with consonants that would be easier than vowels , wouldn't it ?  , I would think that that , being able to code that there 's a a fricative extending from here to here would be a lot easier than classifying precisely which vowel that was . professor b: but I think also it 's just the issue that that when you look at the u w u u when you look at Switchboard for instance very close up there are places where whether it 's a consonant or a vowel you still have trouble calling it a particular phone postdoc g:   grad h: Yeah , but but just saying what the professor b: because it 's you know , there 's this movement from here to here postdoc g: Yeah , I 'm sure . professor b: and and and it 's so I phd e: You 're saying r sort of remove the high level constraints and go bottom - up . Maybe there 's there 's even a better way to do it but it but but that 's , you know , sort of a traditional way of describing these things , phd e:   professor b: and  , actually this might be a g neat thing to talk to postdoc g: That 's nice . professor b: some sort of categories but but something that allows for overlapping change of these things and then this would give some more ground work for people who were building statistical models that allowed for overlapping changes , different timing changes as opposed to just " click , you 're now in this state , which corresponds to this speech sound " and so on . phd a: So this is like gestural  , these g professor b: Yeah , something like that . professor b: actually if we get into that it might be good to , haul John Ohala into this phd a: Right . phd a: But is is the goal there to have this on meeting data , postdoc g: Excellent . phd a: like so that you can do far field studies of those gestures or  , or is it because you think there 's a different kind of actual production in meetings that people use ? Or ? professor b: No , I think I think it 's for for for that purpose I 'm just viewing meetings as being a a neat way to get people talking naturally . And then you have i and then and then it 's natural in all senses , phd e: Just a source of data ? phd a: I see . professor b: in the sense that you have microphones that are at a distance that you know , one might have , and you have the close mikes , and you have people talking naturally . And the overlap is just indicative of the fact that people are talking naturally , phd a:  - huh . professor b: right ? So so I think that given that it 's that kind of corpus , phd d: Yeah . professor b: if it 's gonna be a very useful corpus  , if you say w OK , we 've limited the use by some of our , censored choices , we don't have the video , we don't and so forth , but there 's a lot of use that we could make of it by expanding the annotation choices . professor b: And , most of the things we 've talked about have been fairly high level , and being kind of a bottom - up person I thought maybe we 'd , do some of the others . professor b: people have made a lot of use of of TIMIT and ,  w due to its markings , and then the Switchboard transcription thing , well I think has been very useful for a lot of people . professor b: So phd a: I guess I wanted to , sort of make a pitch for trying to collect more meetings . phd a: I actually I talked to Chuck Fillmore and I think they 've what , vehemently said no before but this time he wasn't vehement and he said you know , " well , Liz , come to the meeting tomorrow professor b: Yeah . Go to their meeting tomorrow and see if we can try , to convince them postdoc g:   professor b: Cuz they have something like three or four different meetings , phd a: because they have And they have very interesting meetings from the point of view of a very different type of of talk than we have here professor b: right ? postdoc g:    phd e: You mean in terms of the topic topics ? phd a: Well , yes and in terms of the the fact that they 're describing abstract things and , just dialogue - wise , professor b:   And then the other thing is , I don't know if this is at all useful , but I asked Lila if I can maybe go around and talk to the different departments in this building to see if there 's any groups that , for a free lunch , professor b: Yes . grad h: You mean non - ICSI ? phd a: non - ICSI , non - academic , grad h: Yeah , I guess you you can try phd a: you know , like government people , grad h: but phd a: I don't know .  , it seems like we we had this idea before of having like linguistics students brought down for free lunches grad h: Well , tha I think that 's her point . phd a: Right , and then we could also we might try advertising again because I think it 'd be good if if we can get a few different sort of non - internal types of meetings postdoc g: Yeah . phd e: Does does John Ohala have weekly phonetics lab meetings ? postdoc g:   grad h: And I think , if we could get phd a: So I actually wrote to him and he answered , " great , that sounds really interesting " . grad h: But , it would be nice if we got someone other than me who knew how to set it up and could do the recording phd a: So grad h: so u I didn't have to do it each time . phd a: and I was thinking professor b: He - he 's supposed he 's supposed to be trained to do it .  , the other thing is that there was a number of things at the transcription side that , transcribers can do , like dialogue act tagging , grad h: It 's not that hard . phd a: disfluency tagging , things that are in the speech that are actually something we 're y working on for language modeling . So if you wanna process a utterance and the first thing they say is , " well " , and that " well " is coded as some kind of interrupt u tag .  , and things like that , th postdoc g: Of course some of that can be li done lexically . phd a: A lot of it can be done postdoc g: And I also they are doing disfluency tagging to some degree already . phd a: I think there 's a second pass and I don't really know what would exist in it . But there 's definitely a second pass worth doing to maybe encode some kinds of , you know , is it a question or not , postdoc g:   postdoc g: I wanted to whi while we 're  , so , to return just briefly to this question of more meeting data ,  I have two questions . One of them is , Jerry Feldman 's group , they they , are they I know that they recorded one meeting . professor b: I think there 's we should go beyond , ICSI but , there 's a lot of stuff happening at ICSI that we 're not getting now that we could . So th there was the thing in Fillmore 's group but even there he hadn't What he 'd said " no " to was for the main meeting . phd e: Well , and and the other thing too is when they originally said " no " they didn't know about this post - editing capability thing . professor b: there 's there 's , the networks group , I don't Do they still meeting regularly or ? grad h: Well , I don't know if they meet regularly or not but they are no longer recording . professor b: But  , ha ha have they said they don't want to anymore or ? grad h: ugh , what was his name ? professor b: i i postdoc g: Joe Sokol ? grad h: Yeah . professor b: OK , so they 're down to three or four people grad h: They and they stopped Yeah . postdoc g: We might be able to get the administration grad h: Well he was sort of my contact , so I just need to find out who 's running it now . phd a: Yeah , it One thing that would be nice postdoc g: I don't know phd a: and this it sounds bizarre but , I 'd really like to look at to get some meetings where there 's a little bit of heated discussion , like ar arguments and or emotion , and things like that . Some group , " yes , we must " grad h: Who 's willing to get recorded and distributed ? phd a: Well , you know , something phd c: Yeah . grad f: Yeah , I don't think the more political argumentative ones would be willing to phd a:  professor b: Yeah , with with with potential use from the defense department . phd a: No , but maybe stu student , groups or , film - makers , or som Something a little bit colorful . Yeah , th there 's a problem there in terms of , the  commercial value of of st  , postdoc g: Yeah , of course there is this problem though , that if we give them the chance to excise later we e might end up with like five minutes out of a f of m one hour phd d: Film - maker . phd a: And I don't mean that they 're angry phd d: Is postdoc g: of Yes . phd a: but just something with some more variation in prosodic contours and so forth would be neat . So if anyone has ideas , I 'm willing to do the leg work to go try to talk to people but I don't really know which groups are worth pursuing . postdoc g: Well there was this K P F A grad h: No that 's postdoc g: but OK . phd a: Or postdoc g: And I had one other one other aspect of this which is , Jonathan Fiscus expressed primar  y a major interest in having meetings which were all English speakers . phd e: Did he mean ,  did he mean and non - British ? grad h: Well phd c: The all native . phd e: He said British was OK ? postdoc g: But but Sure , sure , sure . professor b: Why ? grad h: British is English ? phd c:  postdoc g: Yeah . professor b: Well , I don't I don't I don't think if he didn't say that postdoc g: Native speaking . grad h: So , why would he care ? phd e: Knowing the application phd a: That 's professor b: I remember wh I I remember a study phd a: I was thinking , knowing the , n National Institute of Standards , it is all professor b: I remember a study that BBN did where they trained on this was in Wall Street Journal days or something , they trained on American English and then they tested on , different native speakers from different areas . professor b: it was Swiss w Yeah , so it 's so I think , you know , if he 's if he 's thinking in terms of recognition kind of technology I I I think he would probably want ,  American English , postdoc g: All America , OK . It it yeah , unless we 're gonna train with a whole bunch of postdoc g: I think that the Feldman 's meetings tend to be more that way , aren't they ?  , I sort of feel like they have professor b: I think so , grad h: Maybe . grad h: And maybe there are a few of with us where it was professor b: Yeah . grad h: you know , Dan wasn't there and before Jose started coming , professor b: Yeah . professor b: So , what about what about people who involved in some artistic endeavor ? phd d: Yeah . phd a: Exactly , that 's what I was professor b: You 'd think like they would be phd d: A film - maker . phd a: something where there there is actually discussion where there 's no right or wrong answer but but it 's a matter of opinion kind of thing . phd a: Yeah , we could phd e: A any department that calls itself science phd d: Department . phd d: Computer sci grad h: That postdoc g: We could get Julia Child . phd a: I 'm I 'm actually serious grad h: That 's phd a: because , you know , we have the set up here grad h: Got a ticket . grad f: I know grad h: I could phd a: Not not professor b: Put a little ad up saying , " come here and argue " . grad h: and they they they expressed willingness back when they thought they would be doing more stuff with speech . grad h: But when they lost interest in speech they also stopped answering my email about other stuff , so . phd a: Or people who are really h professor b: They could have a discussion about te grad f: I grad h: We should probably bleep that out . grad f: I heard that at Cal Tech they have a special room someone said that they had a special room to get all your frustrations out that you can go to and like throw things and break things . professor b: Yeah , now that is not actually what we grad f: So we can like post a grad h: Th - that 's not what we want . grad f: No , not to that extent phd a: Well , far field mikes can pick up where they threw stuff on the wall . professor b: Yeah , but we don't want them to throw the far field mikes is the thing . postdoc g: It 'd be fun to get like a a p visit from the grad h: There was a dorm room at Tech that , someone had coated the walls and the ceiling , and , the floor with mattresses . professor b: What did we mean by that ? Remember @ @ ? grad h: Liz wanted to talk about methods of improving accuracy by doing pre - processing . phd a: Well I think that that was just sort of I I already asked Thilo professor b: Oh , you already did that . phd a: but that , it would be helpful if I can stay in the loop somehow with , people who are doing any kind of post - processing , whether it 's to separate speakers or to improve the signal - to - noise ratio , or both , that we can sort of try out as we 're running recognition .  , so , i is that Who else is work I guess Dan Ellis and you phd c: Dan , yeah . professor b: he 's he 's interested in in fact we 're look starting to look at some echo cancellation kind of things . professor b: Which  grad h: I am not sure how much that 's an issue with the close talking mikes , professor b:  ? grad h: but who knows ? professor b: Well , let 's w i isn't that what what you want phd a: I don't know . I 'm bad professor b: t No , so No , i w wha what you what you want when you 're saying improving the wave form you want the close talking microphone to be better . professor b: And the question is to w to what extent is it getting hurt by ,  by any room acoustics or is it just  , given that it 's close it 's not a problem ? phd a: It doesn't seem like big room acoustics problems to my ear professor b:  phd a: but I 'm not an expert . grad h: e I bet with the lapel mike there 's plenty , room acoustic phd a: That that may be true . phd a: But I don't know how good it can get either by those the those methods grad h: Yeah . grad h: So I I think it 's just , phd a: Oh , I don't know . phd a: All I meant is just that as sort of as this pipeline of research is going on we 're also experimenting with different ASR , techniques . phd e: So the problem is like , on the microphone of somebody who 's not talking they 're picking up signals from other people and that 's causing problems ? phd a: R right , although if they 're not talking , using the the inhouse transcriptions , were sort of O K because the t no one transcribed any words there and we throw it out . phd a: But if they 're talking at all and they 're not talking the whole time , so you get some speech and then a "  -  " , and some more speech , so that whole thing is one chunk . And the person in the middle who said only a little bit is picking up the speech around it , that 's where it 's a big problem . postdoc g: You know , this does like seem like it would relate to some of what Jose 's been working on as well , the encoding of the phd d: Yeah . postdoc g: And and he also , he was phd a: The energy , phd d: Yeah , phd a: right . postdoc g: I was t I was trying to remember , you have this interface where you i you ha you showed us one time on your laptop that you you had different visual displays as speech and nonspeech events . Because , eh , it 's possible , eh , eh , in a simp sample view , to , nnn , to compare with c with the segment , the the kind of assessment what happened with the the different parameters . And only with a different bands of color for the , few situation , eh , I consider for acoustic event is enough to @ @ . phd d: I I I see that , eh , you are considering now , eh , a very sophisticated , eh , ehm , eh , @ @ set of , eh , graphic s eh , eh , ehm , si symbols to to transcribe . No ? Because , before , you you are talking about the the possibility to include in the Transcriber program eh , a set of symbols , of graphic symbol to t to mark the different situations during the transcription postdoc g: Oh , I w  - huh . No ? postdoc g: Well , you 're saying So , symbols for differences between laugh , and sigh , and and and slam the door and stuff ? phd d: Yeah . postdoc g: Or some other kind of thing ? phd d: No ? To to mark postdoc g: Well , I wouldn't say symbols so much . The the main change that I that I see in the interface is is just that we 'll be able to more finely c  , time things . postdoc g: But I I also st there was another aspect of your work that I was thinking about when I was talking to you phd a:  . postdoc g: which is that it sounded to me , Liz , as though you and , maybe I didn't q understand this , but it sounded to me as though part of the analysis that you 're doing involves taking segments which are of a particular type and putting them together . postdoc g: And th so if you have like a p a s you know , speech from one speaker , then you cut out the part that 's not that speaker , phd a:   postdoc g: and you combine segments from that same speaker to and run them through the recognizer . Is that right ? phd a: Well we try to find as close of start and end time of as we can to the speech from an individual speaker , postdoc g:   phd a: because then we we 're more guaranteed that the recognizer will for the forced alignment which is just to give us the time boundaries , because from those time boundaries then the plan is to compute prosodic features . phd a: And the sort of more space you have that isn't the thing you 're trying to align the more errors we have .  , so , you know , that that it would help to have either pre - processing of a signal that creates very good signal - to - noise ratio , postdoc g:   phd a: which I don't know how possible this is for the lapel , or to have very to have closer , time you know , synch times , basically , around the speech that gets transcribed in it , or both . So I just wanted to see , you know , on the transcribing end from here things look good . And then the issue of like global processing of some signal and then , you know , before we chop it up is is yet another way we can improve things in that . You can ,   The problem is just that the acoustic when the signal - to - noise ratio is too low , you you 'll get , a  an alignment with the wrong duration pattern or it phd e: Oh , so that 's the problem , is the the signal - to - noise ratio . It 's not the fact that you have like  , what he did is allow you to have , words that were in another segment move over to the at the edges of of segmentations . phd a: Right , things things near the boundaries where if you got your alignment wrong phd e:   It 's that there are problems even in inside the alignments , because of the fact that there 's enough acoustic signal there t for the recognizer to to eat , as part of a word . So , yeah , bottom bottom line is just I wanted to make sure I can be aware of whoever 's working on these signal - processing techniques for , detecting energies , phd d: Yeah . professor b: O K ,  tea has started out there I suggest we c run through our digits and , postdoc g: OK
grad g: So I think maybe what 's causing it to crash is I keep starting it and then stopping it to see if it 's working . postdoc b: And it looks like you 've found a way of  mapping the location to the without having people have to give their names each time ? phd a: Sounds like an initialization thing . postdoc b:  it 's like you have the So you know that grad g: No . postdoc b: are you going to write down that I sat here ? grad g: I 'm gonna collect the digit forms and write it down . u And I should say that  , you just pau you just read each line an and then pause briefly . professor e: So  , you see , Don , the unbridled excitement of the work that we have on this project . grad g: And I 'm surprised I sort of I 'm surprised I forgot that , professor e: Yeah , I I 'd I think it 's some grad g: but  I think that would be a good thing to add . professor e: Yeah , well , that 's  , so I I do have a a an agenda suggestion .  , we I think the things that we talk about in this meeting  tend to be a mixture of  procedural  mundane things and  research points and  I was thinking I think it was a meeting a couple of weeks ago that we we spent much of the time talking about the mundane stuff cuz that 's easier to get out of the way and then we sort of drifted into the research and maybe five minutes into that Andreas had to leave . So  I 'm suggesting we turn it around and and  sort of we have anybody has some mundane points that we could send an email later ,  hold them for a bit , and let 's talk about the the research - y kind of things .  , so  the one th one thing I know that we have on that is  we had talked a a couple weeks before   about the  the stuff you were doing with with    l l attempting to locate events , we had a little go around trying to figure out what you meant by " events " but I think , you know , what we had meant by " events " I guess was  points of overlap between speakers . But I th I gather from our discussion a little earlier today that you also mean  interruptions with something else phd d: Yeah . phd d: To professor e: So at any rate you were you 've you 've done some work on that phd d: right . professor e: and  then the other thing would be it might be nice to have a preliminary discussion of some of the other  research  areas that  we 're thinking about doing .  , I think especially since you you haven't been in in these meetings for a little bit , maybe you have some discussion of some of the p the plausible things to look at now that we 're starting to get data ,  and one of the things I know that also came up  is some discussions that that  that  Jane had with Lokendra  about some some some   work about I I I d I I don't want to try to say cuz I I 'll say it wrong , but anyway some some potential collaboration there about about the about the working with these data . Well , I don't know if we if this is sort of like everybody has something to contribute sort of thing , I think there 's just just a couple a couple people primarily  but   , wh why don't Actually I think that that last one I just said we could do fairly quickly so why don't you you start with that . postdoc b: so , he was interested in the question of you know , relating to his to the research he presented recently ,  of inference structures , and  , the need to build in , this this sort of  mechanism for understanding of language . And he gave the example in his talk about how  , e a I 'm remembering it just off the top of my head right now , but it 's something about how  , i " Joe slipped " you know , " John had washed the floor " or something like that . And I don't have it quite right , but that kind of thing , where you have to draw the inference that , OK , there 's this time sequence , but also the the the causal aspects of the  floor and and how it might have been the cause of the fall and that  it was the other person who fell than the one who cleaned it and it These sorts of things . So , I looked through the transcript that we have so far , and  , fou identified a couple different types of things of that type and  , one of them was something like  , during the course of the transcript , w we had gone through the part where everyone said which channel they were on and which device they were on , and  , the question was raised " Well , should we restart the recording at this point ? " And and Dan Ellis said , " Well , we 're just so far ahead of the game right now we really don't need to " . Now , how would you interpret that without a lot of inference ? So , the inferences that are involved are things like , OK , so , how do you interpret " ahead of the game " ? You know . So it 's the it 's i What you what you int what you draw you know , the conclusions that you need to draw are that space is involved in recording , grad g: metaphorically . postdoc b: that  , i that i we have enough space , and he continues , like " we 're so ahead of the game cuz now we have built - in downsampling " . So you have to sort of get the idea that  , " ahead of the game " is sp speaking with respect to space limitations , that  that in fact downsampling is gaining us enough space , and that therefore we can keep the recording we 've done so far . grad g: So , do you think his interest is in using this as a data source , or training material , or what ? professor e: Well , I I should maybe interject to say this started off with a discussion that I had with him , so  we were trying to think of ways that his interests could interact with ours grad g:   professor e: and   I thought that if we were going to project into the future when we had a lot of data ,  and  such things might be useful for that in or before we invested too much  effort into that he should  , with Jane 's help , look into some of the data that we 're already have and see , is there anything to this at all ? grad g:   professor e: Is there any point which you think that , you know , you could gain some advantage and some potential use for it . Cuz it could be that you 'd look through it and you say " well , this is just the wrong task for for him to pursue his " grad g: Wrong , yeah . professor e: And and  I got the impression from your mail that in fact there was enough things like this just in the little sample that that you looked at that that it 's plausible at least .  , he was he he you know We met and he was gonna go and  you know , y look through them more systematically professor e: Yeah . postdoc b: So it 's , you know , not a matter of a professor e: Yeah . professor e: So anyway , that 's that 's e a quite different thing from anything we 've talked about that , you know , might might might come out from some of this .  , he 's talking about just using text postdoc b: That 's his major I mentioned several that w had to do with implications drawn from intonational contours phd c: pretty much , or ? postdoc b: and that wasn't as directly relevant to what he 's doing . postdoc b: inferences that you draw i from professor e: he certainly could use text , but we were in fact looking to see if there is there is there something in common between our interest in meetings and his interest in in in this stuff . grad g: And I imagine that transcripts of speech  text that is speech probably has more of those than sort of prepared writing . postdoc b: Yeah , I don't think I would make that leap , because i in narratives , you know  , if you spell out everything in a narrative , it can be really tedious , grad g:   grad g: Yeah , I 'm just thinking , you know , when you 're when you 're face to face , you have a lot of backchannel and And postdoc b: Oh . And so I think it 's just easier to do that sort of broad inference jumping if it 's face to face .  , so , if I just read that Dan was saying " we 're ahead of the game " in that in that context , postdoc b: Well Yeah . grad g: I might not realize that he was talking about disk space as opposed to anything else . postdoc b: I you know , I I had several that had to do with backchannels and this wasn't one of them . postdoc b: This this one really does  m make you leap from So he said , you know , " we 're ahead of the game , w we have built - in downsampling " . postdoc b: And the inference , i if you had it written down , would be grad g: I guess it would be the same . But there are others that have backchannelling , it 's just he was less interested in those .  , I f f f I 've @ @ d A minute  , several minutes ago , I , like , briefly was was not listening and So who is " he " in this context ? phd c: Yeah , there 's a lot of pronoun phd f: OK . So I was just realizing we 've You guys have been talking about " he "  for at least  , I don't know , three three four minutes without ever mentioning the person 's name again . Actually to make it worse , Morgan uses " you " and " you " phd f: So this is this is this is gonna be a big , big problem if you want to later do  , you know , indexing , or speech understanding of any sort . phd f: You just wrote this ? phd c: and he never said Li - He looked grad g: Well , I think he 's doing that intentionally , phd c: Right , so it 's great . grad g: aren't you ? phd c: So this is really great phd f: Right . phd c: because the thing is , because he 's looking at the per even for addressees in the conversation , phd d: Yeah . phd c: Yeah , if you have the P Z Ms you should be able to pick up what a person is looking at from their voice . postdoc b: Oh , but you 'd have the phd c: Put Morgan always like this postdoc b: You 'd have fainter phd c: and postdoc b: Wouldn't you get fainter reception out here ? professor e: Well , these grad g: Sure , but I think if I 'm talking like this ? Right now I 'm looking at Jane and talking , now I 'm looking at Chuck and talking , I don't think the microphones would pick up that difference . grad g: So if I 'm talking at you , or I 'm talking at you . professor e: I probably been affect No , I th I think I 've been affected by too many conversations where we were talking about lawyers and talking about and concerns about " oh gee is somebody going to say something bad ? " and so on . professor e: And so I so I 'm I 'm tending to stay away from people 's names even though  postdoc b: I am too . phd c: Even though you could pick up later on , just from the acoustics who you were t who you were looking at . grad g: or or is that just too sensitive ? professor e: No no , it isn't sensitive at all . postdoc b: Well professor e: I was just I was just I was overreacting just because we 've been talking about it . professor e: It 's OK to postdoc b: I I came up with something from the Human Subjects people that I wanted to mention .  , it fits into the m area of the mundane , but they did say You know , I asked her very specifically about this clause of how , you know , it says " no individuals will be identified  , " in any publication using the data . " OK , well , individuals being identified , let 's say you have a a snippet that says , " Joe s  thinks such - and - such about about this field , but I think he 's wrongheaded . " Now  , we 're we 're gonna be careful not to have the " wrongheaded " part in there , but but you know , let 's say we say , you know , " Joe used to think so - and - so about this area , in his publication he says that but I think he 's changed his mind . Then the issue of of being able to trace Joe , because we know he 's well - known in this field , and all this and and tie it to the speaker , whose name was just mentioned a moment ago , can be sensitive . professor e: b But I postdoc b: So I think it 's really really kind of adaptive and wise to not mention names any more than we have to because if there 's a slanderous aspect to it , then how much to we wanna be able to have to remove ? professor e: Yeah , well , there 's that . But I  I think also to some extent it 's just educating the Human Subjects people , in a way , because there 's If  You know , there 's court transcripts , there 's there 's transcripts of radio shows  people say people 's names all the time . It 's just that i  you 're right that there 's more poten If we never say anybody 's name , then there 's no chance of of of slandering anybody , phd c: But , then it won't  , if we if we professor e: but grad g: It 's not a meeting . postdoc b: Well , my feeling on it was that it wasn't really important who said it , you know . phd f: Well , if you ha since you have to  go over the transcripts later anyway , you could make it one of the jobs of the people who do that to mark grad g: Well , we t we t we talked about this during the anon anonymization . grad g: If we wanna go through and extract from the audio and the written every time someone says a name . professor e: So it 's postdoc b: So , we need to talk about this later . I sorta knew I was doing it but it was phd f: Well , I still don't know who " he " is . phd c: No , you have to say , you still don't know who " he " is , with that prosody .  , I I would like to move it into into  what Jose  has been doing postdoc b: Yeah . I I remind that me my first objective eh , in the project is to to study difference parameters to to find a a good solution to detect eh , the overlapping zone in eh speech recorded . But eh , tsk , ehhh In that way I I I begin to to study and to analyze the ehn the recorded speech eh the different session to to find and to locate and to mark eh the the different overlapping zone . And eh so eh I was eh I am transcribing the the first session and I I have found eh , eh one thousand acoustic events , eh besides the overlapping zones , eh I I  the eh breaths eh aspiration eh , eh , talk eh , eh , clap , eh I don't know what is the different names eh you use to to name the the n speech phd a: Nonspeech sounds ? phd d: Yeah . grad g: Oh , I don't think we 've been doing it at that level of detail . Eh , I I I do I don't need to to to mmm to m to label the the different acoustic , but I prefer because eh I would like to to study if eh , I I will find eh , eh , a good eh parameters eh to detect overlapping I would like to to to test these parameters eh with the another eh , eh acoustic events , to nnn to eh to find what is the ehm the false eh , the false eh hypothesis eh , nnn , which eh are produced when we use the the ehm this eh parameter eh  pitch eh , eh , difference eh , feature grad g:   phd a: You know I think some of these  that are the nonspeech overlapping events may be difficult even for humans to tell that there 's two there . phd a: if it 's a tapping sound , you wouldn't necessarily or , you know , something like that , it 'd be it might be hard to know that it was two separate events . grad g: Well You weren't talking about just overlaps phd d: Ye grad g: were you ? You were just talking about acoustic events . phd d: I I I I t I t I talk eh about eh acoustic events in general , grad g: Someone starts , someone stops Yeah . professor e: How many overlaps were there  in it ? No no , how many of them were the overlaps of speech , though ? phd d: How many ? Eh almost eh three hundred eh in one session grad g: Oh , God ! phd d: in five eh in forty - five minutes . postdoc b: Does this ? So if you had an overlap involving three people , how many times was that counted ? phd d: Yeah , three people , two people . Eh ,  I would like to consider eh one people with difference noise eh in the background , be professor e: No no , but I think what she 's asking is if at some particular for some particular stretch you had three people talking , instead of two , did you call that one event ? phd d: Oh . This th I I I con I consider I consider eh an acoustic event , the overlapping zone , the period where three speaker or eh are talking together . grad g: Well So let 's postdoc b: For grad g: So let 's say me and Jane are talking at the same time , and then Liz starts talking also over all of us . phd d: Yeah ? grad g: Is there an event right here ? phd d: Eh no . For me is the overlapping zone , because because you you have s you have more one eh , more one voice eh , eh produced in a in in a moment . If professor e: So then , in the region between since there there is some continuous region , in between regions where there is only one person speaking . professor e: Is it Are you calling the beginning or the end of it the event , phd d: Yeah . professor e: or are you calling the entire length of it the event ? phd d: I consider the the , nnn the nnn , nnn eh , the entirety eh , eh , all all the time there were the voice has overlapped .  , I 'm not considering eh the the ehm eh , the fact of eh , eh , for example , what did you say ? Eh at first eh , eh two talkers are  , eh speaking , and eh , eh a third person eh join to to that . For me , it 's eh it 's eh , all overlap zone , with eh several numbers of speakers is eh , eh the same acoustic event . Wi - but  , without any mark between the zone of the overlapping zone with two speakers eh speaking together , and the zone with the three speakers . grad g: Well , but But you could imagine that three people talking has a different spectral characteristic than two . phd d: I I don't know what eh will will happen with the grad g: Yep . grad g: That 's a lot of overlap , phd d: Yeah ? professor e: So again , that 's that 's three three hundred in forty - five minutes that are that are speakers , just speakers . postdoc b: But a a a th professor e: So that 's about eight per minute . postdoc b: But a thousand events in twelve minutes , that 's phd d: Yeah , but Yeah . postdoc b: Well , but a thousand taps in eight minutes is a l in twelve minutes is a lot . phd c: Actually phd d: I I con I consider I consider acoustic events eh , the silent too . grad g: Silence starting or silence ending phd d: Yeah , silent , ground to bec to detect eh because I consider acoustic event all the things are not eh speech .  silent , I I I I don't I I haven't the eh I I would like to to do a stylistic study professor e: Yeah . phd d: and give you eh with the report eh from eh the the study from the the the session one session . When eh eh I w I I was eh look at eh nnn , the difference speech file , for example , eh if eh we use the ehm the mixed file , to to transcribe , the the events and the words , I I saw that eh the eh speech signal , collected by the eh this kind of mike eh of this kind of mike , eh are different from the eh mixed signal eh , we eh collected by headphone . The the the I I I knew that eh the signal eh , eh would be different , but eh the the problem is eh , eh we eh detected eh difference events in the speech file eh collected by by that mike  qui compared with the mixed file . And so if when you transcribe eh only eh using the nnn the mixed file , it 's possible eh if you use the transcription to evaluate a different system , it 's possible you eh in the eh i and you use the eh speech file collected by the eh fet mike , to eh to nnn to do the experiments with the the system , professor e:   phd d: its possible to evaluate eh , eh or to consider eh acoustic events that which you marked eh in the mixed file , but eh they don't appear in the eh speech signal eh collected by the by the mike . The the reason that I generated the mixed file was for IBM to do word level transcription , not speech event transcription . grad g: So I agree that if someone wants to do speech event transcription , that the mixed signals here phd d: Yeah . grad g: if I 'm tapping on the table , you it 's not gonna show up on any of the mikes , but it 's gonna show up rather loudly in the PZM . So and I I I say eh that eh , eh , or this eh only because eh I c I I in my opinion , it 's necessary to eh to eh to put the transcription on the speech file , collected by the objective signal . phd d:  the the the signal collected by the eh , the real mike in the future , in the prototype to to eh correct the initial eh segmentation eh with the eh real speech professor e:   professor e: Yeah , well , just  , just in that that one s ten second , or whatever it was , example that Adam had that that we we passed on to others a few months ago , there was that business where I g I guess it was Adam and Jane were talking at the same time and and  , in the close - talking mikes you couldn't hear the overlap , and in the distant mike you could . So yeah , it 's clear that if you wanna study if you wanna find all the places where there were overlap , it 's probably better to use a distant mike . professor e: On the other hand , there 's other phenomena that are going on at the same time for which it might be useful to look at the close - talking mikes , phd d: Yeah . phd c: But why can't you use the combination of the close - talking mikes , time aligned ? professor e: so it 's grad g: If you use the combination of the close - talking mikes , you would hear Jane interrupting me , but you wouldn't hear the paper rustling . And so if you 're interested in phd c: I  if you 're interested in speakers overlapping other speakers and not the other kinds of nonspeech , that 's not a problem , professor e: Some of it 's masking masked . grad g: Although the other issue is that the mixed close - talking mikes  , I 'm doing weird normalizations and things like that . phd d: I I I think eh I saw the nnn the eh but eh I eh I have eh any results . I I I saw the the speech file collected by eh the fet mike , and eh eh signal eh to eh to noise eh relation is eh low . phd d: And I I found that nnn that eh , ehm , pr probably , grad g: Did Did you phd d: I 'm not sure eh by the moment , but it 's it 's probably that eh a lot of eh , eh for example , in the overlapping zone , on eh in in several eh parts of the files where you you can find eh , eh eh , smooth eh eh speech eh from eh one eh eh talker in the in the meeting , professor e:   phd d: it 's probably in in that eh in in those files you you can not find you can not process because eh it 's confused with with noise . But eh my idea is to to process only nnn , this eh nnn , this kind of s of eh speech . I 'm not sure it 's a good idea , but eh professor e: No i grad g: Well , it 's more realistic but it 'll it 'll be a lot harder . professor e: Well , it 'd be hard , but on the other hand as you point out , if your if i if if your concern is to get  the overlapping people people 's speech , you will you will get that somewhat better . professor e: Are you making any use  you were you were working with th the data that had already been transcribed . professor e: Now  did you make any use of that ? See I was wondering cuz we st we have these ten hours of other stuff that is not yet transcribed . professor e: Do you phd d: The the transcription by Jane , t eh i eh , I I I want to use to to nnn , eh to put i i it 's a reference for me . But eh the transcription eh for example , I I don't I I 'm not interested in the in the in the words , transcription words , eh transcribed eh eh in eh follow in the in the in the speech file , but eh eh Jane eh for example eh put a mark eh at the beginning eh of each eh talker , in the in the meeting ,  eh she she nnn includes information about the zone where eh there are eh there is an overlapping zone . But eh there isn't any any mark , time temporal mark , to to c eh to mmm e - heh , to label the beginning and the end of the of the professor e:   Right , so she is phd d: ta I 'm I I I think eh we need this information to professor e: Right . So the twelve you you it took you twelve hours of course this included maybe some some time where you were learning about what what you wanted to do , but but  , it took you something like twelve hours to mark the forty - five minutes , your grad g: Twelve minutes . professor e: I thought you did forty - five minutes of phd d: No , forty - five minutes is the is the session , all the session . phd d: Tw - twelve hours of work to to segment eh and label eh twelve minutes from a session of part of f professor e: Oh . I I consider all the all the session because eh I I count the nnn the nnn the overlappings marked by by Jane , professor e: Oh , OK . So it 's three hundred in forty - five minutes , but you have you have time  ,  marked twelve minute the the the  overlaps in twelve minutes of it . phd f: So , can I ask can I ask whether you found  , you know , how accurate  Jane 's   labels were as far as grad g: Well , not just the overlaps , everything . phd f: you know , did she miss some overlaps ? or did she n ? phd d: But , by by the moment , I I don't compare , my my temporal mark with eh Jane , but eh I I want to do it . Because eh eh i per perhaps I have eh errors in the in the marks , I and if I I compare with eh Jane , it 's probably I I I can correct and and and to get eh eh a more accurately eh eh transcription in the file . phd c: Well , not only a word level , but actually phd d: Well phd f: I 'm expect I 'm not expecting phd d: No , it 's phd c: you didn't need to show the exact point of interruption , you just were showing at the level of the phrase or the level of the speech spurt , or grad g: Right . postdoc b: And and sometimes , you know , it was like you could have an overlap where someone said something in the middle , phd d: Yeah . postdoc b: but , yeah , w it just wasn't important for our purposes to have it that i disrupt that unit in order to have , you know , a the words in the order in which they were spoken , it would have it would have been hard with the interface that we have . postdoc b: Now , my a Adam 's working on a of course , on a revised overlapping interface , phd d:  - huh . phd d: I I I think It 's it 's a good eh work , postdoc b: but phd d: but eh I think we need eh eh more information . phd f: I expect you to find more overlaps than than Jane grad g: Always need more for postdoc b: Yeah . I I have to go to phd f: because you 're looking at it at a much more detailed level . professor e: I have grad g: But if it takes sixty to one professor e: Well , I but I have a suggestion about that .  , obviously this is very , very time - consuming , and you 're finding lots of things which I 'm sure are gonna be very interesting , but in the interests of making progress ,  might I s how how would it affect your time if you only marked speaker overlaps ? phd d: Only . professor e: but only mark speaker Do you think that would speed it up quite a bit ? phd d: OK . I I I I w I I wanted to professor e: Do y do you think that would speed it up ?  , speed up your your your marking ? phd d: nnn , I don't understand very . professor e: Now , my suggestion was for the other thirty - three phd d: On - only to mark only to mark overlapping zone , but professor e: Yeah , and my question is , if you did that , if you followed my suggestion , would it take much less time ? phd d: Oh , yeah . professor e: Then I think it 's a good idea , because it phd d: Sure , because I I need a lot of time to to put the label or to do that . professor e: There 's there 's  continual noise  from fans and so forth , and there is  more impulsive noise from  taps and so forth phd d: Yeah . We know that all that 's there and it 's a g worthwhile thing to study , but obviously it takes a lot of time to mark all of these things . professor e: Whereas th i I would think that  you we can study more or less as a distinct phenomenon the overlapping of people talking . Then you can get the Cuz you need If it 's three hundred  i i it sounds like you probably only have fifty or sixty or seventy events right now that are really phd d: Yeah . professor e: And and you need to have a lot more than that to have any kind of  even visual sense of of what 's going on , much less any kind of reasonable statistics . phd c: Now , why do you need to mark speaker overlap by hand if you can infer it from the relative energy in the grad g: Well , that 's That 's what I was gonna bring up . phd c: you shouldn't need to do this p completely by hand , professor e: OK , yeah . professor e: So the idea was that what he was going to be doing was experimenting with different measures such as the increase in energy , such as the energy in the LPC residuals , such as  there 's a bunch of things  , increased energy is - is sort of an obvious one . professor e: and  , it 's not obvious , you could you could do the dumbest thing and get get it ninety percent of the time . But when you start going past that and trying to do better , it 's not obvious what combination of features is gonna give you the you know , the right detector . And so the i the idea of the manual marking was to say " OK this , i you know , it 's it 's really here " . phd a: But I think Liz is saying why not get it out of the transcripts ? phd c: What  is get it from the close - talking mikes . phd c: A or ge get a first pass from those , professor e: We t we t w we t we talked about that . phd c: and then go through sort of It 'd be a lot faster probably to phd f: And you can grad g: Yeah , that 's his ,  professor e: We we we talked about that . s But so it 's a bootstrapping thing and the thing is , phd c: Yeah , I just professor e: the idea was , i we i i we thought it would be useful for him to look at the data anyway , and and then whatever he could mark would be helpful , phd c: Right . You know , do you bootstrap from a simple measurement which is right most of the time and then you g do better , or do you bootstrap from some human being looking at it and then then do your simple measurements ,  from the close - talking mike . phd c: Well , that 's what I wonder , because  or how bad it is , professor e: Well phd c: be  , because that would be interesting grad g: I 'm working on a program to do that , and phd c: especially because the bottleneck is the transcription . phd c: so  it seems like one kind of project that 's not perfect , but  , that you can get the training data for pretty quickly is , you know , if you infer form the close - talking mikes where the on - off points are of speech , professor e: Right , we discussed that . phd c: you know , how can we detect that from a far - field ? grad g: And postdoc b: Oh . grad g: I 've I 've written a program to do that , phd c: OK , I 'm sorry I missed the grad g: and it ,  professor e: It 's OK . And , it seems to work , I 've I 'm sort of fiddling with the parameters , to get it to actually generate something , and I haven't I don't what I 'm working on was working on was getting it to a form where we can import it into the user interface that we have , into Transcriber . I 've worked on it for about half a day , grad h: I have to go . grad g: so give me another half day and I we 'll have something we can play with . professor e: See , this is where we really need the Meeting Recorder query stuff to be working , because we 've had these meetings and we 've had this discussion about this , and I 'm sort of remembering a little bit about what we decided , phd c: Right . phd c: It professor e: So , I think it was partly that , you know , give somebody a chance to actually look at the data and see what these are like , partly that we have e some ground truth to compare against , you know , when when he he gets his thing going , grad g: But professor e: and phd c: Well , it 's definitely good to have somebody look at it . I was just thinking as a way to speed up you know , the amount of postdoc b:   postdoc b: Was that  there m there was this already a script I believe  that Dan had written , that  handle bleedthrough ,  cuz you have this this close you have contamination from other people who speak loudly . So I I haven't tried that , but that If It it might be something it might be a good way of cleaning it up a little . postdoc b: So , some thought of maybe having Yeah , having that be a preprocessor and then run it through yours . professor e: But but that 's a refinement postdoc b: That 's what we were discussing . professor e: and I think we wanna see try the simple thing first , cuz you add this complex thing up  afterwards that does something good y y yo you sort of wanna see what the simple thing does first . professor e: But  , having having somebody have some experience , again , with with  with marking it from a human standpoint , we 're  , I don't expect Jose to to do it for  f fifty hours of of speech , but  we if  if he could speed up what he was doing by just getting the speaker overlaps so that we had it , say , for forty - five minutes , then at least we 'd have three hundred examples of it . professor e: And when when  Adam was doing his automatic thing he could then compare to that and see what it was different . phd a: You know , I did I did  something almost identical to this at one of my previous jobs , and it works pretty well .  , i almost exactly what you described , an energy detector with a median filter , you look for runs . phd a: And so I think doing that to generate these possibilities and then going through and saying yes or no on them would be a quick way to to do it . grad g: Yeah , do you have a patent on it ? phd a: It was when I was working for the government . postdoc b: Well , is this something that we could just co - opt , or is it ? phd a: Nah . I think I think it 's phd a: Yeah , he 's it it doesn't take a long time . I just thought if it was tried and true , then and he 's gone through additional levels of of development . Although if you if you have some parameters like what 's a good window size for the median filter phd a: Oh ! I have to remember . phd f: They grad g: I was doing pretty short , you know , tenth of a second , sorts of numbers . professor e: I don't know , it if if we want to  So , maybe we should move on to other other things in limited time . postdoc b: Can I ask one question about his statistics ? So so in the tw twelve minutes , if we took three hundred and divided it by four , which is about the length of twelve minutes , i  , I 'd expect like there should be seventy - five overlaps . postdoc b: Did you find  more than seventy - five overlaps in that period , or ? phd d: More than ? postdoc b: More than How many overlaps in your twelve minutes ? phd d: How many ? Eh , not @ @ I Onl - only I I transcribe eh only twelve minutes from the professor e: Yeah . phd d: but eh I I don't co eh I don't count eh the the overlap . phd d: I consider I I The the nnn The the three hundred is eh considered only you your transcription . grad g: I b I bet they 're more , because the beginning of the meeting had a lot more overlaps than than sort of the middle . grad g: Because i we 're we 're dealing with the  , in the early meetings , we 're recording while we 're saying who 's talking on what microphone , and things like that , phd d: Yeah . professor e: So so I was gonna ask , I guess about any any other things that that that either of you wanted to talk about , especially since Andreas is leaving in five minutes , that that you wanna go with . phd c: Can I just ask about the data , like very straightforward question is where we are on the amount of data and the amount of transcribed data , just cuz I 'm I wanted to get a feel for that to sort of be able to know what what can be done first and like how many meetings are we recording professor e: Right so there 's this this There 's this forty - five minute piece that Jane transcribed . phd c: and professor e: That piece was then  sent to IBM so they could transcribe so we have some comparison point . Then there 's s a larger piece that 's been recorded and  put on CD - ROM and sent  to IBM . phd c: How many meetings is that ? Like how many grad g: What 's that ? professor e: That was about ten hours , and there was about phd c: t ten It 's like ten meetings or something ?  - huh . And then then we phd a: Ten meetings that have been sent to IBM ? phd c: And professor e: Yeah . grad g: Well , I haven't sent them yet because I was having this problem with the missing files . phd a: H how many total have we recorded now , altogether ? professor e: We 're saying about twelve hours . And we 're recording only this meeting , like continuously we 're only recording this one now ? or ? professor e: No . No , so the the that 's the that 's the biggest one  , chunk so far , grad g: Nope . phd c: Do they meet every week , professor e: And then there phd c: or every professor e: they do . w w And we talked to them about recording some more and we 're going to , we 've started having a morning meeting , today  i starting a w a week or two ago , on the  front - end issues , and we 're recording those ,  there 's a network services and applications group here who 's agreed to have their meetings recorded , phd c: Great . So actually , we 're gonna h start having a a pretty significant chunk and so , you know , Adam 's sort of struggling with trying to get things to be less buggy , and come up quicker when they do crash and stuff things like that , now that  the things are starting to happen . So right now , yeah , I th I 'd say the data is predominantly meeting meetings , but there are scattered other meetings in it and that that amount is gonna grow  so that the meeting meetings will probably ultimately i if we 're if we collect fifty or sixty hours , the meeting meetings it will probably be , you know , twenty or thirty percent of it , not not not eighty or ninety . phd c: So there 's probably there 's three to four a week , grad g: That 's what we 're aiming for . professor e: Yeah and th the the other thing is I 'm not pos I 'm sort of thinking as we 've been through this a few times , that I really don't know maybe you wanna do it once for the novelty , but I don't know if in general we wanna have meetings that we record from outside this group do the digits .  in fact , the morning group is really motivated cuz they 're working on connected digits , so it 's grad g: Actually that 's something I wanted to ask , is I have a bunch of scripts to help with the transcription of the digits . grad g: We don't have to hand - transcribe the digits because we 're reading them and I have those . grad g: And so I have some scripts that let you very quickly extract the sections of each utterance .  , if I did that , is someone gonna be working on it ? professor e: yeah , I I think definitely s so Absolutely . grad g: is it something of interest ? professor e: Yeah , whoever we have working on the acoustics for the Meeting Recorder are gonna start with that .  , I I 'm I 'm interested in it , I just don't have time to do it now . phd f: I was these meetings I 'm sure someone thought of this , but these this  reading of the numbers would be extremely helpful to do  adaptation . phd c: Actually I have o grad g: I I would really like someone to do adaptation . grad g: So if we got someone interested in that , I think it would be great for Meeting Recorder . professor e: Well  , one of the things I wanted to do , that I I talked to to Don about , is one of the possible things he could do or m also , we could have someone else do it , is to do block echo cancellation , grad g: Since it 's the same people over and over . professor e: to try to get rid of some of the effects of the the the far - field effects .  ,  we have the party line has been that echo cancellation is not the right way to handle the situation phd f:   professor e: because people move around , and  , if if it 's if it 's  not a simple echo , like a cross - talk kind of echo , but it 's actually room acoustics , it 's it 's it 's you can't really do inversion , phd f:   professor e: and even echo cancellation is going to  be something It may you Someone may be moving enough that you are not able to adapt quickly and so the tack that we 've taken is more " lets come up with feature approaches and multi - stream approaches and so forth , that will be robust to it for the recognizer and not try to create a clean signal " . But it occurred to me a few months ago that  party lines are always , you know , sort of dangerous . And so we haven't had anybody try to do a good serious job on echo cancellation and we should know how well that can do . So that 's something I 'd like somebody to do at some point , just take these digits , take the far - field mike signal , and the close  mike signal , and apply really good echo cancellation .  , there was a have been some nice talks recently by by Lucent on on their b phd f:  . professor e: the block echo cancellation particularly appealed to me ,  you know , trying and change it sample by sample , but you have some reasonable sized blocks . And  , you know , th phd a: W what is the  the artifact you try to you 're trying to get rid of when you do that ? phd f: Ciao . professor e:  so it 's it you have a a direct   , what 's the difference in If you were trying to construct a linear filter , that would  phd f: I 'm signing off . that would subtract off the   parts of the signal that were the aspects of the signal that were different between the close - talk and the distant . You know , so so   I guess in most echo cancellation Yeah , so you Given that  Yeah , so you 're trying to So you 'd There 's a a distance between the close and the distant mikes so there 's a time delay there , and after the time delay , there 's these various reflections . And if you figure out well what 's the there 's a a least squares algorithm that adjusts itself adjusts the weight so that you try to subtract essentially to subtract off  different  different reflections . Right ? So let 's take the simple case where you just had you had some  some delay in a satellite connection or something and then there 's a there 's an echo . phd a: So that would mean like if you were listening to the data that was recorded on one of those .  , just the raw data , you would you might hear kind of an echo ? And and then this noise cancellation would get professor e: Well , I 'm I 'm I 'm saying That 's a simplified version of what 's really happening . What 's really happening is Well , when I 'm talking to you right now , you 're getting the direct sound from my speech , but you 're also getting , the indirect sound that 's bounced around the room a number of times . OK ? So now , if you  try to r you To completely remove the effect of that is sort of impractical for a number of technical reasons , but I but not to try to completely remove it , that is , invert the the room response , but just to try to   eliminate some of the the effect of some of the echos .  , a number of people have done this so that , say , if you 're talking to a speakerphone ,  it makes it more like it would be , if you were talking right up to it . You say I I I want to use this  this item but I want to subtract off various kinds of echos . So you construct a filter , and you have this this filtered version  of the speech  gets   gets subtracted off from the original speech . phd a: Kind of a clean up thing , that professor e: It 's a clean up thing . professor e: So , echo cancelling is is , you know , commonly done in telephony , and and and it 's sort of the obvious thing to do in this situation if you if , you know , you 're gonna be talking some distance from a mike . phd a: When  , I would have meetings with the folks in Cambridge when I was at BBN over the phone , they had a  some kind of a special speaker phone and when they would first connect me , it would come on and we 'd hear all this noise . And then it was  And then it would come on and it was very clear , professor e: Yeah . So it 's taking samples , it 's doing adaptation , it 's adjusting weights , and then it 's getting the sum . So  ,  anyway that 's that 's kind of a reasonable thing that I 'd like to have somebody try somebody look And and the digits would be a reasonable thing to do that with . I think that 'd be enough data plenty of data to do that with , and i for that sort of task you wouldn't care whether it was  large vocabulary speech or anything .  postdoc b: Is Brian Kingsbury 's work related to that , or is it a different type of reverberation ? professor e: Brian 's Kingsbury 's work is an example of what we did f f from the opposite dogma . Right ? Which is what I was calling the " party line " , which is that  doing that sort of thing is not really what we want . We want something more flexible ,  i i where people might change their position , and there might be , you know There 's also  oh yeah , noise . It 's if you have a clean situation but you just have some delays , Then we 'll figure out the right the right set of weights for your taps for your filter in order to produce the effect of those those echos . But  if there 's noise , then the very signal that it 's looking at is corrupted so that it 's decision about what the right you know , right right  delays are is ,  is right delayed signal is is is  is incorrect . And so , in a noisy situation , also in a in a situation that 's very reverberant with long reverberation times and really long delays , it 's it 's sort of typically impractical . So for those kind of reasons , and also a a c a complete inversion , if you actually I mentioned that it 's kind of hard to really do the inversion of the room acoustics .  , that 's difficult because  often times the the  the system transfer function is such that when it 's inverted you get something that 's unstable , and so , if you you do your estimate of what the system is , and then you try to invert it , you get a filter that actually  , you know , rings , and and  goes to infinity . So it 's so there 's there 's there 's that sort of technical reason , and the fact that things move , and there 's air currents  there 's all sorts of all sorts of reasons why it 's not really practical . So for all those kinds of reasons ,  we we we sort of  , concluded we didn't want to in do inversion , and we 're even pretty skeptical of echo cancellation , which isn't really inversion , and  we decided to do this approach of taking  , just picking  features , which were  will give you more something that was more stable , in the presence of , or absence of , room reverberation , and that 's what Brian was trying to do . I guess you you actually already said this thing about the  about the consent forms , which was that we now don't have to So this was the human subjects folks who said this , or that that ? postdoc b: The a apparently  , we 're gonna do a revised form , of course .  but once a person has signed it once , then that 's valid for a certain number of meetings . So I think from a s practical standpoint , maybe we could have them do it once every ten meetings , or something . It won't be that many people who do it that often , but  just , you know , so long as they don't forget that they 've done it , I guess .  , back on the data thing , so there 's this sort of one hour , ten hour , a hundred hour sort of thing that that we have . We have we have an hour  that that is transcribed , we have we have twelve hours that 's recorded but not transcribed , and at the rate we 're going ,  by the end of the semester we 'll have , I don't know , forty or fifty or something , if we if this really  Well , do we have that much ? phd c: Not really . professor e: Let 's see , we have phd c: So that 's what You know , that professor e:  eight weeks ,  is phd c: So that 's not a lot of hours . professor e: Eight weeks times three hours is twenty - four , so that 's Yeah , so like thirty thirty hours ? phd a: Three Three hours .  I was starting to think of some projects where you would use well , similar to what we talked about with  energy detection on the close - talking mikes . There are a number of interesting questions that you can ask about how interactions happen in a meeting , that don't require any transcription . So what are the patterns , the energy patterns over the meeting ? And I 'm really interested in this but we don't have a whole lot of data . So I was thinking , you know , we 've got the room set up and you can always think of , also for political reasons , if ICSI collected you know , two hundred hours , that looks different than forty hours , even if we don't transcribe it ourselves , professor e: But I don't think we 're gonna stop at the end of this semester . phd c: so professor e: Right ? So , I th I think that if we are able to keep that up for a few months , we are gonna have more like a hundred hours . phd c: is there Are there any other meetings here that we can record , especially meetings that have some kind of conflict in them or some kind of deci  , that are less well I don't  , that have some more emotional aspects to them , or strong grad g: We had some good ones earlier . phd c: There 's laughter ,  I 'm talking more about strong differences of opinion meetings , maybe with manager types , or grad g: I think it 's hard to record those . phd c: To be allowed to record them ? postdoc b: It 's also likely that people will cancel out afterwards . professor e: Yeah , people will get postdoc b: But I but I wanted to raise the KPFA idea . So I I  , I I 'd mentioned to Adam , and that was another thing I was gonna talk  , mention to them before that  there 's  It it oc it occurred to me that we might be able to get some additional data by talking to  acquaintances in local broadcast media . Because , you know , we had talked before about the problem about using found data , that that  it 's just set up however they have it set up and we don't have any say about it and it 's typically one microphone , in a ,  or and and so it doesn't really give us the the the  characteristics we want . But  , it did occur to me that we could go to friends in broadcast media and say " hey you have this panel show , or this you know , this discussion show , and  can you record multi - channel ? " And  they may be willing to record it  with phd c: With lapel mikes or something ? professor e: Well , they probably already use lapel , but they might be able to have it it wouldn't be that weird for them to have another mike that was somewhat distant . professor e: It wouldn't be exactly this setup , but it would be that sort of thing , and what we were gonna get from UW , you know , assuming they they they start recording , isn't als also is not going to be this exact setup . the other thing that occurred to me after we had that discussion , in fact , is that it 's even possible , since of course , many radio shows are not live ,  that we could invite them to have like some of their record some of their shows here . postdoc b: Wow ! phd c: Well Or The thing is , they 're not as averse to wearing one of these head - mount  , they 're on the radio , grad g: Right , as we are . phd c: Th - that 's an a side of style a style that we 're not collecting here , so it 'd be great . professor e: And and the  , the other side to it was the what which is where we were coming from I 'll I 'll talk to you more about it later is that is that there 's there 's  the radio stations and television stations already have stuff worked out presumably ,  related to , you know , legal issues and and permissions and all that . So I think it 's something we should look into , you know , we 'll collect what we collect here hopefully they will collect more at UW also and  and maybe we have this other source . But yeah I think that it 's not unreasonable to aim at getting , you know , significantly in excess of a hundred hours . The thing was , I was hoping that we could @ @ in the under this controlled situation we could at least collect , you know , thirty to fifty hours . And at the rate we 're going we 'll get pretty close to that I think this semester . Yeah I was mostly trying to think , " OK , if you start a project , within say a month , you know , how much data do you have to work with . And you you wanna s you wanna sort of fr freeze your your data for awhile so  right now and we don't have the transcripts back yet from IBM right ? Do Oh , do we now ? professor e: Well , we don't even have it for this f you know , forty - five minutes , that was phd c: So  , not complaining , I was just trying to think , you know , what kinds of projects can you do now versus  six months from now professor e: Yeah . So I was thinking right now it 's sort of this exploratory stuff where you you look at the data , you use some primitive measures and get a feeling for what the scatter plots look like , grad g: Right . professor e: and and and  and meanwhile we collect , and it 's more like yeah , three months from now , or six months from now you can you can do a lot of other things . phd c: Cuz I 'm not actually sure , just logistically that I can spend you know , I don't wanna charge the time that I have on the project too early , before there 's enough data to make good use of the time . phd c:  anyway , I shouldn't say too much , but  if someone came that was great and wanted to do some real work and they have to end by the end of this school year in the spring , how much data will I have to work with , with that person . And so it 's professor e: i Yeah , so I would think , exploratory things now .  , three months from now  ,  the transcriptions I think are a bit of an unknown cuz we haven't gotten those back yet as far as the timing , but I think as far as the collection , it doesn't seem to me l like , unreasonable to say that  in January , you know , ro roughly  which is roughly three months from now , we should have at least something like , you know , twenty - five , thirty hours . phd c: And we just don't know about the transcription part of that , professor e: So that 's postdoc b: Yeah , we need to I think that there 's a possibility that the transcript will need to be adjusted afterwards , phd c: so .  , it postdoc b: and  es especially since these people won't be  used to dealing with multi - channel  transcriptions . postdoc b: So I think that we 'll need to adjust some And also if we wanna add things like  , well , more refined coding of overlaps , then definitely I think we should count on having an extra pass through . There 'd be no reason why a person couldn't get together several  , you know , friends , and come and argue about a topic if they wanted to , right ? professor e: If they really have something they wanna talk about as opposed to something @ @  , what we 're trying to stay away from was artificial constructions , but I think if it 's a real Why not ? Yeah . postdoc b: You could do this , phd c: Well yeah , postdoc b: you know . phd c: or just if you 're if you ha If there are meetings here that happen that we can record even if we don't  have them do the digits , or maybe have them do a shorter digit thing like if it was , you know , one string of digits , or something , they 'd probably be willing to do . grad g: We don't have to do the digits at all if we don't want to . phd c: Then , having the data is very valuable , cuz I think it 's  politically better for us to say we have this many hours of audio data , especially with the ITR , if we put in a proposal on it .  , whether it 's transcribed or not  , is another issue , but there 's there are research questions you can answer without the transcriptions , or at least that you can start to answer . phd a: Would it help at all  , we 're already talking about sort of two levels of detail in meetings . One is   without doing the digits Or , I guess the full - blown one is where you do the digits , and everything , and then talk about doing it without digits , what if we had another level , just to collect data , which is without the headsets and we just did the table - mounted stuff . I 'm really scared grad g: It seems like it 's a big part of this corpus is to have the close - talking mikes . phd c:  or at least , like , me personally ? I would I couldn't use that data . phd c: So it 's a great idea , professor e: Yeah , I I b By the by the way , I don't think the transcriptions are actually , in the long run , such a big bottleneck . phd c: and if it were true than I would just do that , but it 's not that bad like the room is not the bottleneck , and we have enough time in the room , it 's getting the people to come in and put on the and get the setup going . Right ? And and  d Do you have any idea when when  the you 'll be able to send  the ten hours to them ? grad g: Well , I 've been burning two C Ds a day , which is about all I can do with the time I have . So early next week we send it to them , and then then we check with them to see if they 've got it and we we start , you know asking about the timing for it . professor e: So I think once they get it sorted out about how they 're gonna do it , which I think they 're pretty well along on , cuz they were able to read the files and so on . professor e: Right ? grad g: Yeah , but professor e: Well grad g: Yeah , who knows where they are . professor e: Yeah , but You know , so they they they have you know , they 're volunteering their time and they have a lot of other things to do , phd c: What if grad g: Yeah , you we can't complain . professor e: right ? But they But at any rate , they 'll I I think once they get that sorted out , they 're they 're making cassettes there , then they 're handing it to someone who they who 's who is doing it , and  I think it 's not going to be I don't think it 's going to be that much more of a deal for them to do thirty hours then to do one hour , I think . phd c: Really ? So it 's the amount of professor e: It 's it 's just getting it going . phd c: I don't know , if there 's any way without too much more overhead , even if we don't ship it right away to IBM even if we just collect it here for awhile , to record you know , two or three more meeting a week , just to have the data , even if they 're  not doing the digits , but they do wear the headphones ? professor e: But the lunch meetings are pretty much one person getting up and phd c: No , I meant , sorry , the meetings where people eat their lunch downstairs , maybe they don't wanna be recorded , but grad g: Oh , and we 're just chatting ? phd c: Just the ch the chatting . phd c: I actually I actually think that 's useful data ,  the chatting , grad g: Yeah , the problem with that is I would I think I would feel a little constrained to You know ?  , some of the meetings phd c: but OK . phd c: Alright , so I 'll just throw it out there , if anyone knows of one more m or two more wee meetings per week that happen at ICSI ,  that we could record , I think it would be worth it . Well , we should also check with Mari again , because they because they were really intending , you know , maybe just didn't happen , but they were really intending to be duplicating this in some level . And there 's a lot of different meetings at UW   really m a lot more than we have here right cuz we 're not right on campus , grad g: Right . phd a: Is the  , notion of recording any of Chuck 's meetings dead in the water , or is that still a possibility ? professor e: they seem to have some problems with it .  , but , again , Jerry is Jerry 's open So  , we have two speech meetings , one  network meeting ,  Jerry was open to it but I I s One of the things that I think is a little a little bit of a limitation , there is a think when the people are not involved  in our work , we probably can't do it every week . You know ? I I I I think that that people are gonna feel  are gonna feel a little bit constrained . Now , it might get a little better if we don't have them do the digits all the time . And the then so then they can just really sort of try to put the mikes on and then just charge in and grad g: Yep . phd c: What if we give people you know , we cater a lunch in exchange for them having their meeting here or something ? postdoc b: Well , you know , I I do think eating while you 're doing a meeting is going to be increasing the noise . postdoc b: But I had another question , which is  , you know , in principle , w  , I know that you don't want artificial topics , phd c: Alright , alright , alright . postdoc b: but  it does seem to me that we might be able to get subjects from campus to come down and do something that wouldn't be too artificial . postdoc b: and i you know , people who are Because , you know , there 's also this constraint . We d it 's like , you know , the the  goldibears goldi goldilocks , it 's like you don't want meetings that are too large , but you don't want meetings that are too small . And  a and it just seems like maybe we could exploit the subj human subject p p pool , in the positive sense of the word . phd a: Well , even  , coming down from campus is sort of a big thing , but what about postdoc b: We could pay subjects . phd a: or what about people in the in the building ? phd c: Yeah , I was thinking , there 's all these other peo phd a: there 's the State of California downstairs , and phd c: Yeah .  grad g: I just really doubt that  any of the State of California meetings would be recordable and then releasable to the general public . grad g: So I  I talked with some people at the Haas Business School who are i who are interested in speech recognition phd c: Alright , well . grad g: and , they sort of hummed and hawed and said " well maybe we could have meetings down here " , but then I got email from them that said " no , we decided we 're not really interested and we don't wanna come down and hold meetings . phd a: What about Joachim , maybe he can professor e: But but we c But I think , you know , we get some scattered things from this and that . professor e:  i I have better contacts in radio than in television , but phd a: You could get a lot of lively discussions from those radio ones . phd c: Well , and they 're already they 're these things are already recorded , grad g: Yep . phd c: we don't have to ask them to even and I 'm not sure wh how they record it , but they must record from individual professor e: n Well No , I 'm not talking about ones that are already recorded . I 'm talking about new ones phd c: Why why not ? professor e: because because because we would be asking them to do something different . I know for instance Mark Liberman was interested  in in LDC getting data , and professor e: Right , that 's the found data idea . professor e: But what I 'm saying is  if I talk to people that I know who do these th who produce these things we could ask them if they could record an extra channel , let 's say , of a distant mike . So , since I 'm interested in the distant mike stuff , I wanna make sure that there is at least that somewhere phd c: Right .   professor e: and  But if we ask them to do that they might be intrigued enough by the idea that they  might be e e willing to the I might be able to talk them into it . We 're getting towards the end of our disk space , so we should think about trying to wrap up here . Well I don't why don't we why d u why don't we   turn them turn grad g: OK , leave leave them on for a moment until I turn this off , cuz that 's when it crashed last time
professor g: Alright ! grad a: So , sorry about not professor g: We 're not crashing . postdoc f: I don't know if you 're professor g: Yeah , that 's right . postdoc f: maybe raise the issue of microphone ,  procedures with reference to the cleanliness of the recordings . professor g: OK , transcription , microphone issues postdoc f: And then maybe ask , th  , these guys . The we have great great , p steps forward in terms of the nonspeech - speech pre - segmenting of the signal . phd d: use grad a: but I 'm not sure if that 's of general interest or not . professor g:  phd b: Since ,  since I have to leave as usual at three - thirty , can we do the interesting stuff first ? postdoc f: I beg your pardon ? professor g: Well phd c: Which is ? grad a: What 's the interesting stuff ? postdoc f: I beg your pardon ? phd d: Yeah . professor g: But phd b: Well , I guess the work that 's been done on segmentation would be most phd c: Yeah .  , and , the other thing , which I 'll just say very briefly that maybe relates to that a little bit , which is that , one of the suggestions that came up in a brief meeting I had the other day when I was in Spain with , Manolo Pardo and Javier , Ferreiros , who was here before , was , why not start with what they had before but add in the non - silence boundaries . So , in what Javier did before when they were doing ,  h he was looking for , speaker change points . As a simplification , he originally did this only using silence as , a putative , speaker change point . professor g: And , he did not , say , look at points where you were changing broad sp  , phonetic class , for instance . professor g: And , so one of the things that they were pushing in d in discussing with me is , w why are you spending so much time , on the , feature issue , when perhaps if you sort of deal with what you were using before phd d:  - huh . professor g: and then just broadened it a bit , instead of just ta using silence as putative change point also ? phd d: Nnn , yeah . professor g: So then you 've got you already have the super - structure with Gaussians and H - you know , simple H M Ms and so forth . And you you might So there was a there was a little bit of a a a a difference of opinion because I I thought that it was it 's interesting to look at what features are useful . professor g: But , on the other hand I saw that the they had a good point that , if we had something that worked for many cases before , maybe starting from there a little bit Because ultimately we 're gonna end up with some s su kind of structure like that , phd d: Yeah . professor g: where you have some kind of simple  and you 're testing the hypothesis that , there is a change . Yeah , why don't we do the speech - nonspeech discussion ? postdoc f: Yeah . Do I I hear you you didn't phd c: Speech - nonspeech ? OK . phd c: so , what we basically did so far was using the mixed file to to detect s speech or nonspeech portions in that . phd c: And what I did so far is I just used our old Munich system , which is an  - ba based system with Gaussian mixtures for s speech and nonspeech . And it was a system which used only one Gaussian for silence and one Gaussian for speech . phd c: Adam , Dave , and I , we did , for that dialogue and I trained it on that . They they can use it or ? postdoc f: they they think it 's a terrific improvement . postdoc f: And , y you also did some something in addition which was , for those in which there was , quiet speakers in the mix . phd c: And so I did two mixtures , one for the loud speakers and one for the quiet speakers . grad a: And did you hand - label who was loud and who was quiet , or did you just ? phd c: I did that for for five minutes of one dialogue grad a: Right . phd c: It 's just our our old Munich , loudness - based spectrum on mel scale twenty twenty critical bands and then loudness . phd c: And four additional features , which is energy , loudness , modified loudness , and zero crossing rate . And so I did some some modifications in those parameters , basically changing the minimum minimum length for s for silence to have , er to have ,  yeah to have more or less , silence portions in inserted . grad a: But for overlap I imagine that doesn't work at all , phd c: Yeah . But it it saves so much time the the transcribers professor g:  grad a: Yep . W w we originally we did that professor g: Just phd c: but we saw , when we used it , f for our close - talking microphone , which yeah , for our for our recognizer in Munich we saw that w it 's it 's not it 's not so necessary . professor g: Yeah , I don't think it 's a big deal for this application , phd c: Yeah . But then there 's another thing that also Thilo 's involved with , which is ,  OK , and and also Da - Dave Gelbart .  we ,  regarding the representation of overlaps , because at present , because of the limitations of th the interface we 're using , overlaps are , not being encoded by the transcribers in as complete and , detailed a way as it might be , and as might be desired I think would be desired in the corpus ultimately . postdoc f: So we don't have start and end points at each point where there 's an overlap . So @ @ the limits of the over of of the interface are such that we were at this meeting we were entertaining how we might either expand the the interface or find other tools which already do what would be useful . Because what would ultimately be , ideal in my my view and I think  , I had the sense that it was consensus , is that , a thorough - going musical score notation would be the best way to go . Because you can have multiple channels , there 's a single time - line , it 's very clear , flexible , and all those nice things . So , I spoke I had a meeting with Dave Gelbart on on and he had , excellent ideas on how the interface could be modified to to do this kind of representation . But , he in the meantime you were checking into the existence of already , existing interfaces which might already have these properties .  , I talked with , Munich guys from from Ludwi - Ludwig Maximilians University , who do a lot of transcribing and transliterations . phd c: And they basically said they have they have , a tool they developed themselves and they can't give away , f it 's too error - prone , and had it 's not supported , a a a and professor g: Yeah . phd c: But , Susanne Bur - Burger , who is at se CMU , he wa who was formally at in Munich and w and is now at with CMU , she said she has something which she uses to do eight channels , trans transliterations , eight channels simultaneously , professor g: Excuse me . grad a: Well , maybe we should get it and if it 's good enough we 'll arrange Windows machines to be available . postdoc f: I also wanted to be sure  , I 've I 've seen the this this is called Praat , PRAAT , which I guess means spee speech in Dutch or something . phd c: Yeah , but then I 'm not sure that 's the right thing for us . professor g: The other thing , to keep in mind , we 've been very concerned to get all this rolling so that we would actually have data , postdoc f: Mmm , yeah . professor g: but , I think our outside sponsor is actually gonna kick in postdoc f:   So I don't know if we have a long - term need to do lots and lots of transcribing . I think we had a very quick need to get something out and we 'd like to be able to do some later because just it 's inter it 's interesting . But as far a you know , with with any luck we 'll be able to wind down the larger project . phd b: But you s grad a: What our decision was is that we 'll go ahead with what we have with a not very fine time scale on the overlaps . postdoc f: And and I was just thinking that , if it were possible to bring that in , like , you know , this week , then when they 're encoding the overlaps it would be nice for them to be able to specify when you know , the start points and end points of overlaps . postdoc f: And , so my my goal was w m my charge was to get eleven hours by the end of the month . And it 'll be I 'm I 'm I 'm clear that we 'll be able to do that . postdoc f: I sent it to ,  who did I send that to ? I sent it to a list and I thought I sent it to the e to the local list . postdoc f: You saw that ? So Brian did tell me that in fact what you said , that ,  that our that they are making progress and that he 's going that they 're going he 's gonna check the f the output of the first transcription and and professor g: basically it 's it 's all the difference in the world .  , basically it 's just saying that one of our one of our best people is on it , postdoc f: Yeah . So phd b: But about the need for transcription , postdoc f: Isn't that great ? phd b: don't we didn't we previously decide that the IBM transcripts would have to be checked anyway and possibly augmented ? professor g: So . grad a: Yeah , and Dave Gelbart did volunteer , postdoc f: Good . grad a: and since he 's not here , I 'll repeat it to at least modify Transcriber , which , if we don't have something else that works , I think that 's a pretty good way of going . My approach originally , and I 've already hacked on it a little bit it was too slow because I was trying to display all the waveforms . grad a: That if you just display the mix waveform and then have a user interface for editing the different channels , that 's perfectly sufficient . And and , Dan Ellis 's hack already allows them to be able to display different waveforms to clarify overlaps and things , grad a: No . They can only display one , postdoc f: so that 's already grad a: but they can listen to different ones . postdoc f: Oh , yes , but Well , yes , but what  is that , from the transcriber 's perspective , those two functions are separate . And Dan Ellis 's hack handles the , choice the ability to choose different waveforms from moment to moment . postdoc f:  grad a: The waveform you 're looking at doesn't change . postdoc f: Yeah , but that 's that 's OK , cuz they 're they 're , you know , they 're focused on the ear anyway . postdoc f: the hack to preserve the overlaps better would be one which creates different output files for each channel , grad a: Right . postdoc f: which then would also serve Liz 's request of having , you know , a single channel , separable , cleanly , easily separable , professor g:   Well , holidays may have interrupted things , cuz in in in They seem to want to get absolutely clear on standards for transcription standards and so forth with with us . I just think I told them to contact Jane that , if they had a grad a: Oh , OK . So is it cuz with any luck there 'll actually be a a there 'll be collections at Columbia , collections at at UW  Dan Dan is very interested in doing some other things , grad a: Right . grad a: Well , I think it 's important both for the notation and the machine representation to be the same . postdoc f: N there was also this , email from Dan regarding the speech - non nonspeech segmentation thing . postdoc f: I don't know if , we wanna ,  and Dan Gel - and Dave Gelbart is interested in pursuing the aspect of using amplitude as a a a as a basis for the separation . He was talking he was talking  , we he had postdoc f: Cross professor g: Yeah , cross - correlation . phd c: Cross professor g: I had mentioned this a couple times before , the c the commercial devices that do , voice ,  you know , active miking , postdoc f:  - huh . professor g: So , by doing that , you know , rather than setting any , absolute threshold , you actually can do pretty good , selection of who who 's talking . professor g:  And those those systems work very well , by the way , so people use them in panel discussions and so forth with sound reinforcement differing in in sort of , phd d:  - huh . professor g:  and , those if Boy , the guy I knew who built them , built them like twenty twenty years ago , grad a:  . Cuz there is one thing that we don't have right now and that is the automatic , channel identifier . postdoc f: That that , you know , that would g help in terms of encoding of overlaps . postdoc f: The the transcribers would have less , disentangling to do if that were available . So I think , you know , basically you can look at some p you have to play around a little bit , to figure out what the right statistic is , postdoc f: But . professor g: but you compare each microphone to some statistic based on the on the overall phd c: Yeah . So that , you cou yo grad a: Yeah , although the the using the close - talking I think would be much better . professor g: I just it 'd be If I was actually working on it , I 'd sit there and and play around with it , and and get a feeling for it .  , the the the ,  But , you certainly wanna use the close - talking , as a at least . professor g: I don't know if the other would would add some other helpful dimension or not . What what are the different , classes to to code , the the overlap , you will use ? postdoc f: to code d phd d: What you you postdoc f: so types of overlap ? phd d: Yeah . postdoc f: so at a meeting that wasn't transcribed , we worked up a a typology . postdoc f: And ,  phd d: Look like , you t you explaining in the blackboard ? The ? Yeah ? Yeah . So it i the it 's basically a two - tiered structure where the first one is whether the person who 's interrupted continues or not . And then below that there 're subcategories , that have more to do with , you know , is it , simply backchannel phd d:   postdoc f: or is it , someone completing someone else 's thought , or is it someone in introducing a new thought . And I hope that if we do a forced alignment with the close - talking mike , that will be enough to recover at least some of the time the time information of when the overlap occurred .  , I I I I 've phd b: So who 's gonna do that ? Who 's gonna do forced alignment ? grad a: Well , u  , IBM was going to . grad a: and I imagine they still plan to but but , you know , I haven't spoken with them about that recently . postdoc f: It occurs to me one of my transcribers t told me today that she 'll be finished with one meeting , by professor g:   postdoc f: well , she said tomorrow but then she said you know , but the , you know let 's let 's just , say professor g:   I know these are er , I could send him that if it would be possible , or a good idea or not , to try to do a s forced alignment on what we 're on the way we 're encoding overlaps now . professor g: you know , basically he 's he just studies , he 's a colleague , a friend , and , postdoc f: Yeah ! professor g: they and and , you know , the the organization always did wanna help us . professor g: It was just a question of getting , you know , the right people connected in , who had the time . professor g: So , eh grad a: Is he on the mailing list ? The Meeting Recorder mailing li ? postdoc f: Oh ! grad a: We should add him . phd e: Did something happen , Morgan , that he got put on this , or was he already on it , grad a: Add him . phd e: or ? professor g: No , I , eh , eh , p It it oc I h it 's Yeah , something happened . So , where are we ? Maybe , brief Well , let 's why don't we talk about microphone issues ? postdoc f: Yeah . professor g: That was that was a grad a: so one thing is that I did look on Sony 's for a replacement for the mikes for the head m head - worn ones cuz they 're so uncomfortable . But I think I need someone who knows more about mikes than I do , because I couldn't find a single other model that seemed like it would fit the connector , which seems really unlikely to me . Does anyone , like , know stores or know about mikes who who would know the right questions to ask ? professor g: Oh , I probably would . phd e: You couldn't you couldn't find the right connector to go into these things ? grad a: Yep . When I looked , i they listed one microphone and that 's it phd e: Huh ! grad a: as having that type of connector . Well , let 's look at it together grad a: it seems it seems really unlikely to me that there 's only one . professor g: and postdoc f: And there 's no adaptor for it ? phd c: Yeah . professor g: Who who are we buying these from ? grad a: professor g: That 'd be grad a: I have it downstairs . grad a: And then ,  just in terms of how you wear them  , I had thought about this before .  , when when when you use a product like DragonDictate , they have a very extensive description about how to wear the microphone and so on . grad a: But I felt that in a real situation we were very seldom gonna get people to really do it and maybe it wasn't worth concentrating on . But professor g: Well , I think that that 's that 's a good back - off position . That 's what I was saying earlier , th that , you know , we are gonna get some recordings that are imperfect and , hey , that 's life . But I I think that it it doesn't hurt , the naturalness of the situation to try to have people wear the microphones properly , if possible , grad a:   professor g: because , the natural situation is really what we have with the microphones on the table . professor g: I think , you know , in the target applications that we 're talking about , people aren't gonna be wearing head - mounted mikes anyway . professor g: So this is just for u these head - mounted mikes are just for use with research . professor g: And , it 's gonna make You know , if if An - Andreas plays around with language modeling , he 's not gonna be m wanna be messed up by people breathing into the microphone . professor g: So it 's it 's ,  grad a: Well , I 'll dig through the documentation to DragonDictate and ste s see if they still have the little form . professor g: Right ?  , and any phd b: It 's interesting , I talked to some IBM guys , last January , I think , I was there . phd b: And they said , the breathing is really a a terrible problem for them , to to not recognize breathing as speech . grad a: Well , that 's the It seemed to me when I was using Dragon that it was really microphone placement helped an in ,  an enormous amount . grad a: So you want it enough to the side so that when you exhale through your nose , it doesn't the wind doesn't hit the mike . professor g: I remember when I was when I I I I used , a prominent laboratory 's , speech recognizer about ,  This was , boy , this was a while ago , this was about twelve twelve years ago or something . And , they were they were perturbed with me because I was breathing in instead of breathing out . And they had models for they they had Markov models for br breathing out but they didn't have them for breathing in . Well , what I wondered is whether it 's possible to have to maybe use the display at the beginning grad a: Yeah . postdoc f: to be able to to judge how how correctly  , have someone do some routine whatever , and and then see if when they 're breathing it 's showing . postdoc f: I don't know if the if it 's professor g: I grad a: You can definitely see it . grad a: And so , you know , I 've I 've sat here and watched sometimes the breathing , professor g: I grad a: and the bar going up and down , and I 'm thinking , I could say something , but professor g: I think grad a: I don't want to make people self - conscious . And you can do some , you know , first - order thing about it , which is to have people move it , a away from being just directly in front of the middle phd d: Yeah . postdoc f: Yeah , i professor g: And then , you know , I think there 's not much Because you can't al you know , interfere w you can't fine tune the meeting that much , I think . It just seems like i if something l simple like that can be tweaked and the quality goes , you know , dramatically up , then it might be worth doing . My my feedback from the transcribers is he is always close to crystal clear and and just fan fantastic to phd c: Yeah . postdoc f: I could say something about about the Well , I don't know what you wanna do . professor g: About what ? postdoc f: About the transcribers or anything or ? I don't know . professor g: Well , the other phd b: But , just to to ,  professor g: why don't we do that ? phd b: One more remark , concerning the SRI recognizer . It is useful to transcribe and then ultimately train models for things like breath , and also laughter is very , very frequent and important to to model . phd b: So , grad a: So , phd b: if you can in your transcripts mark grad a: mark them ? phd b: mark very audible breaths and laughter especially , phd c: Mmm . postdoc f: They 're putting Eh , so in curly brackets they put " inhale " or " breath " . Now they 're they 're not being awfully precise , m So they 're two types of laughter that are not being distinguished . postdoc f: One is when sometimes s someone will start laughing when they 're in the middle of a sentence . postdoc f: And and then the other one is when they finish the sentence and then they laugh . So , I I did s I did some double checking to look through  , you 'd need to have extra  e extra complications , like time tags indicating the beginning and ending of of the laughing through the utterance . phd b: It 's not so I don't think it 's ,  postdoc f: And that and what they 're doing is in both cases just saying " curly brackets laughing " a after the unit . phd b: As as long as there is an indication that there was laughter somewhere between two words I think that 's sufficient , phd c: Yeah . phd b: So as long as you can stick a you know , a t a tag in there that that indicates that there was laughter , grad a: Oh , I didn't know that . grad a: That would be a really interesting prosodic feature , postdoc f: Then phd d: Yeah . postdoc f: So , if they laugh between two words , you you 'd get it in between the two words . postdoc f: But if they laugh across three or four words you you get it after those four words . phd b: Well , the thing that you is hard to deal with is whe when they speak while laughing . phd b: But , that 's not as frequent as just laughing between speaking , postdoc f: OK . grad a: So are do you treat breath and laughter as phonetically , or as word models , or what ? phd b: so professor g:  is it ? phd d: Huh . There was a there 's actually a word for  , it 's not just breathing but all kinds of mouth grad a:   grad a: So train a phone in the neural net ? phd b: Same thing ? Yeah . professor g: No grad a: Oh , it does ? phd b: So the so the the mouth noise , word has just a single phone , that is for that . professor g: Right ?  , you could you could say well , let  we now think that laughter should have three sub sub sub - units in the the three states ,  different states . professor g: And then you would have three  , you know , eh , eh , it 's u grad a: Do whatever you want . phd b: And the the pronun the pronunciations the pronunciations are l are somewhat non - standard . phd b: They actually are  , it 's just a single , s  , you know , a single phone in the pronunciation , but it has a self - loop on it , so it can grad a: To go on forever ? phd b: r can go on forever . grad a: And how do you handle it in the language model ? phd b: It 's just a it 's just a word . We also tried , absorbing these  , both laughter and and actually also noise , and ,  phd d: Yeah . We also tried absorbing that into the pause model  , the the the model that that matches the stuff between words . You you did get me to thinking about I I 'm not really sure which is more frequent , whether f f laughing I think it may be an individual thing . grad a: I was noticing that with Dan in the one that we ,  we hand tran hand - segmented , professor g: Yeah . And and one thing that c that we 're not doing , of course , is we 're not claiming to , get be getting a representation of mankind in these recordings . Why don why don't we just since we 're on this vein , why don't we just continue with , what you were gonna say about the transcriptions postdoc f: OK . professor g: and ? postdoc f: the I I 'm really very for I 'm extremely fortunate with the people who , applied and who are transcribing for us . They are ,  really perceptive and very ,  and I 'm not just saying that cuz they might be hearing this . grad a: Cuz they 're gonna be transcribing it in a few days . So I , e you know , I I brought them in and , trained them in pairs because I think people can raise questions grad a: That 's a good idea . postdoc f: you know , i i the they think about different things and they think of different and  , I trained them to , f on about a minute or two of the one that was already transcribed . This also gives me a sense of You know , I can I can use that later , with reference to inter - coder reliability kind of issues . But the main thing was to get them used to the conventions and , you know , the idea of the th th the size of the unit versus how long it takes to play it back so these th sort of calibration issues . And then , I just set them loose and they 're they all have e a already background in using computers . postdoc f: Well , they they 're very perce they 'll So one of them said " well , you know , he really said " n " , not really " and " , phd d: Yeah . postdoc f: so what what should I do with that ? " grad a: Yeah . If it 's an a noncanonical p " That one , I think we you know , with Eric 's work , I sort of figure we we can just treat that as a variant . But I told them if if there 's an obvious speech error , like I said in one thing , professor g: OK . postdoc f: and I gave my my example , like I said , " microfon " in instead of " microphone " . But it but I thought it 's not worth fixing cuz often when you 're speaking everybody knows what what you mean . postdoc f: But I have a convention that if it 's obviously a noncanonical pronunciation a speech error with you know , wi within the realm of resolution that you can tell in this native English American English speaker , you know that I didn't mean to say " microfon . " Then you 'd put a little tick at the beginning of the word , professor g: Yeah . postdoc f: and that just signals that , this is not standard , and then in curly brackets " pron error " . Well Well , you know , it might be something we 'd wanna do with some , s small subset of the whole thing . Where were they when we needed them ? postdoc f: I think professor g: We certainly wouldn't wanna do it with everything .  , if ,  so I I told them that , we don't know if this will continue past the end of the month professor g:  - huh . postdoc f: and I also m I think they know that the data p source is limited and I may not be able to keep them employed till the end of the month even , although I hope to . professor g: The other thing we could do , actually , is , use them for a more detailed analysis of the overlaps . professor g: Right ? grad a: We could get a very detailed overlap if they were willing to transcribe each meeting four or five times . professor g: But I 've been saying the other thing is just go through it for the overlaps . professor g: Right ? postdoc f: And with the right in interface professor g: Given that y and and do so instead of doing phonetic , transcription for the whole thing , phd d: Yeah . professor g: which we know from the Steve 's experience with the Switchboard transcription is , you know , very , very time - consuming . And and you know , it took them I don't know how many months to do to get four hours . But , the other thing is since we 've been spending so much time thinking about overlaps is is maybe get a much more detailed analysis of the overlaps . professor g: I 'm open to every consideration of what are some other kinds of detailed analysis that would be most useful . professor g: It 's a we have we have due to @ @ variations in funding we have we seem to be doing , very well on m money for this this year , and next year we may have have much less . grad a: Is you mean two thousand one ? professor g: So I don't wanna hire a grad a: Calendar year or ? professor g: calendar year two thousand one . So it 's  , it 's we don't wanna hire a bunch of people , a long - term staff , grad a: Full - time . professor g: because the the funding that we 've gotten is sort of a big chunk for this year . But having temporary people doing some specific thing that we need is actually a perfect match to that kind of , funding . phd e: Are they working full - time now , or ? postdoc f: But Some of them are . But what  is Oh , I shouldn't say it that way because that does sound like forty - hour weeks . I th I I would say they 're probably they don't have o they don't have other things that are taking away their time . professor g: I postdoc f: I I I haven't checked them all , but just spot - checking . grad a: I think it would be professor g: I remember when we were transcribing BeRP , Ron Kay , volunteered to to do some of that . Well , you know , and I also thought , y Liz has this , eh , you know , and I do also , this this interest in the types of overlaps that are involved . These people would be great choices for doing coding of that type if we wanted , grad a: We 'd have to mark them . grad a: I think it would also be interesting to have , a couple of the meetings have more than one transcriber do , professor g: Yeah . postdoc f: You know , there 's also , the e In my mind , I think A An - Andreas was leading to this topic , the idea that , we haven't yet seen the the type of transcript that we get from IBM , and it may just be , you know , pristine . But on the other hand , given the lesser interface Cuz this is , you know we 've got a good interface , we 've got great headphones , m  professor g: It could be that they will  theirs will end up being a kind of fir first pass or something . professor g: Maybe an elaborate one , cuz again they probably are gonna do these alignments , which will also clear things up . Al - although you have to s Don't you have to start with a close enough approximation of the of the verbal part to be able to ? professor g: Well , tha that 's that 's debatable . professor g: Right ?  , so the so the argument is that if your statistical system is good it will in fact , clean things up . professor g: And , so in principle you could start up with something that was kind of rough  , to give an example of , something we used to do , at one point , back back when Chuck was here in early times , is we would take , da take a word and , have a canonical pronunciation and , if there was five phones in a word , you 'd break up the word , into five equal - length pieces which is completely gross . professor g: Right ?  , th the timing is off all over the place in just about any word . You start off with that and the statistical system then aligns things , and eventually you get something that doesn't really look too bad . professor g: So so I think using a a good aligner , actually can can help a lot . If you have a good alignment , it helps the , th the human in in taking less time to correct things . I guess there 's another aspect , too , and I don't know  , this this is very possibly a different , topic . So like in a you know , the topics that are covered during a meeting with reference to the other , uses of the data , professor g:   postdoc f: so being able to find where so - and - so talked about such - and - such , then ,  e  , I I I did sort of a a rough pass on encoding , like , episode - like level things on the , transcribed meeting professor g:   postdoc f: where that i if that 's something that we wanna do with each meeting , sort of like a ,  it 's like a manifest , when you get a box full of stuff , or or if that 's ,  professor g:   postdoc f: i I I don't know what  , level of detail would be most useful . I don't know i if that 's something that I should do when I look over it , or if we want someone else to do , or whatever . professor g: eh , was p Well , you know , the thing I 'm concerned about is we wanted to do these digits postdoc f: Oh , yeah . But I think , do you , maybe , eh ? Did you prepare some whole thing you wanted us just to see ? phd d: Yeah . professor g: how long a ? phd d: I I think it 's it 's fast , because , I have the results , eh , of the study of different energy without the law length . Eh , eh , in the in the measurement , the average , dividing by the by the , variance . phd d: the other ,  the the last w  , meeting eh , I don't know if you remain we have problem to with the with with the parameter with the representations of parameter , because the the valleys and the peaks in the signal , eh , look like , eh , it doesn't follow to the to the energy in the signal . professor g: No , that there 's no point in going through all of that if that 's the bottom line , really . professor g: So , I I think we have to start  , there there 's two suggestions , really , which is ,  what we said before is that , phd d: Mmm , yeah . professor g: it looks like , at least that you haven't found an obvious way to normalize so that the energy is anything like a reliable , indicator of the overlap . professor g: I I 'm I 'm still a little f think that 's a little funny . professor g: but but you don't want to keep ,  keep knocking at it if it 's if you 're not getting any any result with that . But , the other things that we talked about is , pitch - related things and harmonicity - related things , phd d: Yeah .  But , a completely different tack on it wou is the one that was suggested , by your colleagues in Spain , phd d: Yeah . professor g: That is to say , use , you know , as as you 're doing with the speech , nonspeech , use some very general features . professor g: You know , have a have a couple Markov models and and , try to indi try to determine , you know , w when is th when are you in an overlap , when are you not in an overlap . professor g: And let the , statistical system determine what 's the right way to look at the data . professor g: I I , I think it would be interesting to find individual features and put them together . professor g: But given the limitation in time and given the fact that Javier 's system already exists doing this sort of thing , phd d: Yeah . professor g: but , its main limitation is that , again , it 's only looking at silences which would phd d: Yeah . phd d: I I I think that , eh , the possibility , eh , can be that , eh , Thilo , eh , working , eh , with a new class , not only , eh , nonspeech and speech , but , eh , in in in the speech class , professor g:   phd d: dividing , eh , speech , eh , of from a speaker and overlapping , to try to to do , eh , eh , a fast a fast , eh , experiment to to prove that , nnn , this fea eh , general feature , eh , can solve the the the problem , professor g: Yeah . phd d: And I hope the the next week I will have , eh , some results and we we will show we will see , eh , the the parameter the pitch , eh , tracking in with the program . phd d: And , nnn , nnn professor g: Ha - h have you ever looked at the ,  Javier 's , speech segmenter ? phd c: No . professor g: Cuz again the idea is there the limitation there again was that he was he was only using it to look at silence as a as a as a as a p putative split point between speakers . professor g: But if you included , broadened classes then in principle maybe you can cover the overlap cases . phd c: Yeah , but I 'm not too sure if if we can really represent overlap with with the s detector I I I used up to now , phd d: Mmm , yeah . grad a: I think with phd c: the to speech - nonspeech as grad a: That 's right . But I think Javier 's phd c: it 's only speech or it 's it 's it 's nonspeech . professor g: N n grad a: It doesn't have the same Gaus -  , H M M modeling , phd c: Yeah . grad a: But ,  professor g: Well , it 's sort of has a simple one . grad a: Does it ? professor g: Right ? It 's it 's just it 's just a isn't it just a Gaussian phd d: Yeah . Oh , it doesn't have it doesn't have any temporal ,  ? grad a: Maybe I 'm misremembering , but I did not think it had a Markov professor g: I thought it Yeah . phd d: No , Javier di doesn't worked with , a Markov grad a: Yeah , I didn't think so . So he 's just he just computes a Gaussian over potential grad a: Yep . professor g: And and grad a: It 's just , that i it he has the two - pass issue that What he does is , as a first pass he he p he does , a guess at where the divisions might be and he overestimates . And that 's just a data reduction step , so that you 're not trying at every time interval . grad a: And right now he 's doing that with silence and that doesn't work with the Meeting Recorder . professor g: The other thing one could do is Couldn't  , it 's So you have two categories phd c: Yeah . Couldn't you have a third category ? So you have ,  you have , nonspeech , single - person speech , and multiple - person speech ? postdoc f: He has this on his board actually . Don't you have , like those those several different categories on the board ? professor g: Right ? And then you have a Markov model for each ? phd c:  I 'm not sure . But it 's not too easy , I think , the the transition between the different class , to model them in in the system I have now . professor g: the th the reason why , I was suggesting originally that we look at features is because I thought , well , we 're doing something we haven't done before , phd c: Yeah . professor g: It seems like if two people two or more people talk at once , it should get louder , phd c: Yeah . professor g: and , there should be some discontinuity in pitch contours , phd c: I had the impression . professor g: and , there should overall be a , smaller proportion of the total energy that is explained by any particular harmonic sequence in the spectrum . professor g: So far , Jose has has been By the way , I was told I should be calling you Pepe , but phd d: Yeah . professor g: the has has , been exploring , e largely the energy issue and , as with a lot of things , it is not  , like this , it 's not as simple as it sounds . professor g: And then there 's , you know Is it energy ? Is it log energy ? Is it LPC residual energy ? Is it is it is it , delta of those things ?  , what is it no Obviously , just a simple number absolute number isn't gonna work . So it should be with compared to what ? Should there be a long window for the normalizing factor and a short window for what you 're looking at ? phd c: Yeah . professor g: Or , you know , how b short should they be ? So , phd d:  . professor g: th he 's been playing around with a lot of these different things and and so far at least has not come up with any combination that really gave you an indicator . professor g: So I I still have a hunch that there 's it 's in there some place , but it may be given that you have a limited time here , it it just may not be the best thing to to to focus on for the remaining of it . professor g: So pitch - related and harmonic - related , I 'm I 'm somewhat more hopeful for it . professor g: But it seems like if we just wanna get something to work , phd c: Yeah . professor g: that , their suggestion of of Th - they were suggesting going to Markov models , but in addition there 's an expansion of what Javier did . professor g: even if the features that you give it are maybe not ideal for it , it 's just sort of this general filter bank phd c: Yeah . professor g: or or cepstrum or something ,  Eee it 's in there somewhere probably . phd d: But , eh , what did you think about the possibility of using the Javier software ? Eh , the ,  the ,  the BIC criterion , the the t to train the the Gaussian , eh , using the the mark , eh , by hand , eh , eh , to distinguish be mmm , to train overlapping zone and speech zone .  , eh , I I I think that an interesting , eh , experiment , eh , could be , th eh , to prove that , mmm , if s we suppose that , eh , the the first step  , the the classifier what were the classifier from Javier or classifier from Thilo ? W What happen with the second step ? I  , what what happen with the , eh the , clu the ,  the clu the clustering process ? grad a:   grad a: What do you mean ? phd d: I  , that is is enough is enough , eh , to work well , eh , to , eh , separate or to distinguish , eh , between overlapping zone and , eh , speaker zone ? Because th if if we if we , eh , nnn , develop an classifier and the second step doesn't work well , eh , we have another problem . I had tried doing it by hand at one point with a very short sample , phd d: N grad a: and it worked pretty well , but I haven't worked with it a lot . So what I d I d I took a hand - segmented sample phd d: Nnn , yeah . grad a: and I added ten times the amount of numbers at random , phd d: Yeah . But is is if grad a: But this was just very anecdotal sort of thing . phd d: But it 's possible with my segmentation by hand that we have information about the the overlapping , grad a: Right . So if we if we fed the hand - segmentation to Javier 's and it doesn't work , then we know something 's wrong . phd d: this kind o emph emphasises parameter and Gaussian grad a: Yeah . Y do you know where his software is ? Have you used it at all ? phd d: I yeah have
We've received apologies for absence from Janet Finch-Saunders, and also from Dawn Bowden, and I'd like to welcome Huw Irranca-Davies, who is substituting for Dawn Bowden. We'll move on, then, to our evidence session for our inquiry on school improvement and raising standards. I'd like to welcome Kirsty Williams AM, Minister for Education, and Steve Davies, director of education. We've got a lot of ground to cover, so we'll go straight into questions, if that's okay. If I can just start by asking you: to what extent is the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development still involved in the Welsh Government's school improvement journey? kirsty williams am: First of all, can I thank the committee for their invitation this morning, and their interest in this particular area?As you will be aware, on coming into office, the director and I agreed to ask the OECD to do a rapid review of the state of Welsh education at the beginning of this Assembly term. I was very clear in the national missionthat I would invite the OECD back to review our progress against that mission, and that has happened in the tail end of last year, and the OECD will publish their latest report on Welsh education next month now, in March. So, the expectation is that the report will be published on 23 March, and my intention is to make a statement to the Chamber on 24 March. Actually, the continuing relationship with OECD is about self-evaluation of the entirety of the system and Welsh Government. We don't want to accept our own orthodoxy and just be in a bubble where we are constantly listening to ourselves and those people who might want to agree with us or tell us what we want to hear. That's a risk for Ministers and for Government, because we want them to give an honest evaluation of where we are, but that's a really important tool for me, to ensure that we're constantly testing ourselves. The nature of that review is that the OECD were able to talk to whoever they felt it was important to talk to, so that included practitioners on the ground, elements of the middle tier, as well as Welsh Government. And I know, ChairI hope you'll be pleased to hear thisthat the reports of this committee have formed parts of their review, looking at how the Senedd itself has contributed to and has held the Government to account. Can I ask about the powers under the School Standards and Organisation (Wales) Act 2013, to ask you to tell us about the use of those powers either by Welsh Government or by local authorities, and how effective you feel that legislation has been? kirsty williams am: Okay. Well, as you'll be aware, local authorities have quite extensive powers of intervention in schools if they feel that is necessary. If I'm honest, I think there's a mixed picture, with some local authorities using those powers not on a regular basis, but obviously demonstrating a willingness to use those powers. Since that legislation came into being, there have been a number of reasons, because of course a local authority has to give a reason for using those powers of intervention. They usually focus on standards, but sometimes they focus on a breakdown in governance arrangements, perhaps, or a failure or a breakdown in financial management. And the types of interventions that have been used have included, in some cases, appointing additional governors to governing bodies, or suspending a school's delegated budget so the local authority takes on, then, financial control of that particular school, or sometimes applying to the Welsh Government to entirely replace a governing body and establish an intervention board. So, if I can give you an example of where that's been used and has been successful, in Flintshire. They applied to Welsh Government for two interim executive boards, in Sir Richard Gwyn Catholic High School and in Ysgol Trefonnen. The IEBs were put in place and both of those schools, which had been in special measures, moved quite rapidly, actually, out of special measures. Perhaps the most recent example of this is one that the Chair will know very well in her own constituency of Torfaen, in Cwmbran High School, where Torfaen has intervened in that case. My expectation always is that local authorities should be the first port of call, and I would encourageand we always encouragelocal authorities to take a proactive approach to intervention and to use those powers. Can I ask, then, about the national evaluation and improvement resource and how significant a role that will play in the raising of school standards, and how you feel it's evolved since it was first conceived? kirsty williams am: So, this brings us back to the principle of self-evaluation and something, if we're honest, we've not been very good at. If you look at a number of chief inspectors' reports into the Welsh education system, self-evaluation has always been identified as something that is missing or underdeveloped in our system to date, hence, then, the work to establish not a new approach, but a more robust approach to self-evaluation. We've done that in conjunction, again, with the OECD, middle tier and practitioners. It's really important, throughout the entirety of our reform journey that that's done in co-construction, because we want this resource to be usable in schools. So, it's all very well having a conceptual idea and people outside the classroom working on it, but if it's of no practical use to a school leadership team, then we won't see the impact. We're in the testing phase at the moment and having it evaluated itself, with a view to introducing that resource across the system at the start of the new academic year, in September 2020. I truly believe that, if we're to make progress in Welsh education, we have to develop the skills within our system to have robust self-evaluation. So, it's not left to an individual school to come up with a system; it's right the way across the system. My hope would be that those principles could then be applied to local education authorities, to regional school improvement services and Welsh Government as part of a whole-system approach to self-evaluation. steve davies: So, they have played a critical role and, as we know, as the Minister has said in the past, she may introduce policy and practice, but if Estyn are part of it then schools, usually, because they recognise that it will be part of the inspection processit gives it greater push and support around it. kirsty williams am: And I think, if I just say as well, that the external perception of what that's about is really important. It's not a test of school readiness for reform, it is a genuine attempt for a school to evaluate their strengths, their weaknesses and where they need to go next. And because of the word 'toolkit'the feedback was that it gave the impression of a checklist, 'Just do this and check list'. So, it'll be called the national evaluation and improvement resource, rather than the toolkit, because, as I said, the feedback was that 'toolkit' gave the impression of a checklist exercise, and it's got to be about more than that if it's going to be meaningful. lynne neagle am: Okay.Before I bring Suzy in, can I just welcome Sin Gwenllian, who is joining us via video-conference in north Wales? Morning, Sin. suzy davies am: Yes, the resource, thank youabout whether there were any conflicting ideas in the process of development that made it quite difficult to zone in on something that school leadership teams, in particular, could rely on. Were there differences of opinion on what this should look like? kirsty williams am: Not that I'm aware of from the practitioners that I've spoken to who have been part of that. The head of Gladestry has been involved in this process, and she said that she'd really enjoyed the process of working alongside Estyn and the OECD as a school leader to be able to shape it. suzy davies am: I'm not suggesting that there has been; I'm just interested as to how it had worked, that's all. steve davies: Chair, I think, inevitably, when you bring stakeholders together, they're not going to be in total agreement as to how it's going to work, and I think initially one of the challenges was having Estyn there as part of the facilitation group. There are always some concerns that, actually, it's coming from a to inspect, oral, judgmental tick box. So, we had some early day challenges where we had to convinceand, ultimately, Estyn convinced themthat they were there to help and support as opposed to to inspect, and that the model that was developed, as the Minister said, was not going to be a tick box, 'You are good at this part of self-evaluation', it was to build the skillsets up. You know, four years into the job, what I've reflected on as well is there is this sometimes a feeling out there that the Minister says all the right stuff, but you're not actually going to do it, so, when you talk about a new approach to doing things, you're not actually serious about it. So, trying to build that confidence that we are serious about developing a new system around self-improvement, which is different from accountabilitysometimes, the practitioners are like, 'Oh, yes, we've heard it all before but it never actually happens.' And I think that's been a part of the constantnot pressure, but the responsibility on Welsh Government is in following through. So, we said that we were going to do this in the national mission, and we are going to do it. I'm really proud that there or thereabouts, a few months either way, we've actually kept to the timetable as outlined in the national mission, and that helps build confidence within the sector that we are committed to that programme and we're going to do what we say we're going to do. lynne neagle am: And a final question from me: how effective do you think the investment in school standards has been in this Assembly term, as opposed to the approach taken in the last Assembly term, where there was the protection put in place for core school budgets? kirsty williams am: Well, I think, first of all, it's important that, whilst this additional resource is specifically targeted at school standards, that is only a part of a much wider education budget, a budget thatyou knowis incredibly complex. And so it is really challenging to be able to draw straight linesyou know, 'We did this and it's resulted in that'given that we're looking at the entirety of school funding here. What's been really important is that, if you drill down into what that money has been spent on, 50 per cent of it has been directed towards professional learning in one form or another to support our teaching professionals. I've said it time and time again: an education system cannot exceed the quality of the people who stand in front of our children day in, day out to work with them and teach them. Therefore, that investment in staff and investment in the professional learning of our staff and support for them I think is making a difference already but, importantly, will continue to make a difference. But I think it is really challenging to be able to say, 'Well, we spent this bit of money and it definitely led to that', because it's such a complex picture. And, again, what we do know from international best practice, what do we know that works in driving up standards, and then how can we align the money that we've got to supporting that? And, as I said, 50 per cent of that money has gone directly to simply supporting the professional learning of those who work with our children. We're going to talk now a bit about schools causing concern with questions from Huw Irranca-Davies. If I can, just first of all, zoom in on the way in which we actually decide which schools need what support. So, we've got the school categorisation system, which we're familiar with. We've also got Estyn inspection reports, then we've got other intelligence, including local intelligence on the ground. How do you decide from that? How is it decided what schools need support, need challenge? How do we do that? kirsty williams am: Well, you're right: what we have is a variety of ways in which we can identify schools that need support, or need to be challenged on their practice. So, our school improvement serviceit's a risk-based approach, so they can evaluate where they need to put their time, effort and resource. Sometimes, it's used by other people for other things, but that is not its primary purpose; its primary purpose there is not one of accountability, it is one of identifying risk and aligning that then to the support that is available. That is our method of holding schools and their governing bodies to account for their practice and for the work that they do. The elements that go into making that judgment around the levels of support have changed, and, of course, the Estyn inspection regime is also changing. huw irranca-davies am: And you've made, with feedback over the last few years, adjustments to the way that the categorisation system works. Are you content with where it is now, or do you see more adjustments being made? Have you got things in front of you that you're getting feedback on saying 'Well, we need to tweak this again a little bit'? kirsty williams am: So, that system has evolved over time. Initially, on coming into office, when I first came in, it was purely driven by data, and it was also done in quartiles. So, there was a certain number of schools that had to be in the bottom, which drove practitioners mad. They were like 'Ah, every year, there's going to be some of us that have to be in the bottom quartile', because of the way in which it was arranged, which seemed very unfair to them. It's not just purely driven on data now; there are other judgmentsthe professional judgments of our challenge advisers are taken into account. And I would expect that situation to continue to evolve to align itself to our curriculum reform, and our changes in self-evaluation. I expect that that system will continue to evolve and change, so that it complements and assists in the reform journey as other parts of the system change. I think, for any impartial reader of the way that the trends have been going on this, there is some good news within that, in that, certainly, those schools that might have been identified as have been okay but coasting along, seem to be moving up the categories, although we still do have that. Well, it's what the system is there to do, it's to identify those schools that do need that additional support. And I like your analogy of a triage system'You're fit; keep on doing what you're doing and do it well; you need more support, we'll put the support in.' But, can I turn to those schools that are causing significant concern, and how we identify them? The Estyn chief inspector's conclusions at the end of the 2017-18 report that these schools are not being identified early enoughthere's a need to do something urgently about these concerns, particularly in secondary schools. Have we addressed that? Are you content that we've addressed that concern? Was he right? kirsty williams am: No, the chief inspector is absolutely rightabsolutely right. In some ways, when a school goes into special measures, in a way, that's a failure of the system, because that should have been identified sooner. huw irranca-davies am: So just to ask, bearing in mind the earlier discussion we were having, how is it that we don't identify those schools? kirsty williams am: That's ityou're quite right. Undoubtedly, what categorisation has done is led to a greater understanding, I think, on behalf of local education authorities' and school improvement services' knowledge about their schools. But we are not there yet in terms of necessarily, then, moving those schools more quickly, once they've been identified as needing the highest level of support to see improvement. So you will have seen from the last publication of categorisation data that our primary sector continues to improvemore and more and more of our primary schools are in a green rating, which is very satisfying to me. But we have got more of an issue with secondary schools, and we have a particular issue with the same schools being identified in that level of categorisation. So even though we've identified them as needing that extra help, they are not moving at pace away from that system. The first is, we are, again, looking at different sets of data that can give us even earlier warning systems that things are going wrong in a schooland perhaps Steve will explain later. For instance, staff sickness, and carefully monitoring staff sickness, because there is a direct correlation between high levels of staff sickness in a school and what is going on in the school. And we have a new multi-agency approach, working with those schools to try and move them more forward. And that multi-agency panel includes the school itself, the local authority, the regional consortia school improvement staff, Estyn and Welsh Governmentas a multi-agency panel to support improvement in that school. So, for instance, what would normally happen, Estyn would come in, Estyn would make a judgment on the schoolrequiring special measures or urgent improvementand Estyn would go away. They'd go away for six months, and then they'd come back in six months, and they'd make another judgment, 'No, still not good enough', and disappear for six months. We're sayingEstyn and the Welsh Government have agreed that's not the best approach; Estyn need to be part of the solution, rather than just coming and making a judgment. Actually, we've had local authorities coming to us and saying, 'Can we put more schools in? Rather than just having two of our high schools, can we engage more in this project and this pilot?' It's being evaluated by Cardiff Metropolitan University and Swansea University, so we're having some academic overview to see, actually, does this approach work, can we evidence itthat it actually makes a difference? And it's actuallyI'd like to claim all the credit for it, but it's actually not dissimilar to something that's happening in Scotland as well. But we knew that carrying on doing the same old thing clearly wasn't moving these schools, we needed a new approach, and this is what we're doing at the moment. Steve, I don't know steve davies: I think your important point is about, 'What about the schools that are sliding in that direction?' And it's bringing together what we know from Estyn, but also, critically, local authorities have knowledge of their schools, and so do consortia. So, the Minister gave the example of staff sicknessnot always a trigger, but it's one of those. If you look at movement of pupils out of a school, you can look at complaints, you can look at, actually, emerging increased use of HR resources that a school pulls on a local authority. The point the Minister made about Estyn as well is, historically, when they go into special measures, Estyn, at the end of that week, call in, historically, either the region or the local authority, they will feed back to one of them, and then they go away. But, as the Minister said, we want to keep a very clear distinction between the accountability and the transparency to the public, to parents, with the very detailed collective work of that multi-agency group to actually make that difference over time. Does that deal with the issue of the schools that have been identified in those categories of requiring significant improvement and requiring special measures? Are those the ones that will be identified now, or is that above and beyond that again? kirsty williams am: Well, those are the ones that are primarily at the forefront of our minds, but this way of sharing data better, to step in earlier, is part of our attempt to address what the chief inspector says about stepping in earlynot waiting until a school gets into special measures and a formal judgment from Estyn of that, but actually using that intelligence to get support in there earlier. The three elements that that multi-agency approach look at are: what are the fundamentals that need addressing in this school? What is the capacity of the school itself to be able to address those fundamentals? And, what extra support needs to go into that senior management team and the governing body to get those fundamentals addressed? And actually, what does sustainable improvement look like? Because, again, one of the issues, sometimes, that happens is, a school goes into a category with Estyn, there's a big push and a big, 'We must do something' and the school comes out, but actually, that improvement is not sustainable. It's the low-hanging fruit; it's the easy wins that have been achieved, but actually, perhaps some of the fundamental challenges underlying in that school haven't been addressed in that process. So, this is about what will sustainable improvement look like in six months, what's it going to look like in 12 months and what's it going to look like in 18 months. So, actually, a more strategic, longer term approach to real change in a school rather than, perhaps, some of the easy-to-fix items that make a school as if it's doing better, but we really haven't tackled some of the underlying problems that make that school vulnerable to slipping back. Does that make sense? lynne neagle am: I've got a couple of supplementaries on. Sorry? kirsty williams am: Does that make sense? lynne neagle am: Yes. We've got a couple of supplementaries on this, first from Suzy and then from Sin. Obviously, I'm pleased to hear that this work is being done, but I'm wondering. What strikes me, in the recent past, at least, particularly as we've got the usual suspects in this category. I've got to ask myself why it is that councils have been reluctant, perhaps, to step in with these schools earlier, particularly as they've got consortia or middle-tier support as well. Has there been a deficit in that space that has meant that councils don't feel equipped to step in? I just don't really get it why they've been reluctant to step in so far. If they've been nervous about doing it, because they don't feel that they've got the tools to do it, then I think that's pretty important, because as you were saying, we were talking about fundamentals; surely, councils have been able to deal with fundamentals, and more importantly, consortia up until now. Because, obviously, we're asking these players to give us evidence at some point, so perhaps I'd like to challenge them on how come we're here now. I see our job as corralling the collective effort, and I think, for too long in the system, there has been a lack of co-ordination. So, this is about bringing and corralling a collective effort to address this, going forward, in more sustainable way. And I think it does come back to this issue around self-evaluation and a willingness to be open, honest and upfront about some of the challenges that we've got. It's not easy, is it? It's not easy to accept or to acknowledge sometimes when things are suzy davies am: That they don't know how to do this. kirsty williams am: Well, that they're going badly, or perhaps they don't know exactly how to make the difference. So this approach, as I said, is a new way of trying to coral that collective effort across the board. But, I don't know if Stevebecause you've done other roles in the system, so perhaps you've got a different insight. There are others that we're working with, and yes, at its best, it's done as a joint exercise where they use their regional school improvement service to help in the identification that there is a need for this.They take advice as to what the action is, whether it is, as the Minister said, in the more significant areas, a board, or whether a warning notice comes in terms of standards or finance. So, we're working with them and we're working with the Welsh Local Government Association to share that practice. An example of that work is: we have done a development training session for cabinet members for education, and scrutiny leads for education across Wales, and all 22 local authorities came to that and engaged with that. That was partly about self-improvement, but it was also about where significant issues arise, you have to constructively confront them. And that comes with what the region knows, and increasingly, we're looking to have it consistently across 22 local authorities, so they are collecting all the additional data that we referred to earlier, so they can legitimately hold a mirror up and say, 'This is a real concern that we have. We're not punishing you, but we're registering the seriousness, and we want you to address it.' And we're making progress. I believe it's genuinely more consistent now, but I'd be lying if I said that there was consistency across all 22 local authorities. sian gwenllian am: Because you are moving to a more sophisticated approach in terms of identifying problems sooner, and so can offer the support earlier, is it time to think about moving away from the system of categorisation entirely? That is, has the categorisation system reached the end of its usefulness, and is the multi-agency approach, this more sophisticated approach, a better way, ultimately, of being able to assist schools in moving forward? kirsty williams am: I think, Sin, as I said earlier, the categorisation system has evolved over time, and my expectation is that it will continue to evolve, because it has to be consistent with our overall approach to school improvement and raising standards. I expect OECD will have feedback for us on this important part of our system, and we'll wait to see exactly what they say about it, but as I said in answer to Huw Irranca-Davies earlier, I haven't got a closed mind; we've demonstrated over the last four years our willingness to change the system to make it a smarter system, and we will continue to keep that under review, as we move forward. If I could just go back briefly, it doesn't sound like a very exciting thing, does it, when we say we've been doing work with the WLGA, with cabinet members, but also scrutiny, because that's a really important part of the jigsaw as well, is actually local government scrutiny of the performance of your education portfolio holder and the leadership of your council. So this is about trying to up the ante on all sides, so that those issues around 'What are you doing in your local authority to use the powers that you have?' You know, sometimes, making sure that everybody in that authoritythose in power and those who are there to hold those in power to accounthave the necessary skills, knowledge and understanding to do that appropriately. We've talked a lot about early identification; getting in there and then managing the improvement, this triage approach there, and then getting some grip of it, as well, in doing all of that. I won't touch on the primary schools, but let's just look at secondary schools11 per cent of secondary schools inspected in the last two academic years judged as unsatisfactory, needing urgent improvement. There will always be secondary schools and primary schools that hit moments of crisis for one reason or another, but 11 per cent to me, and to any layperson, would seem unreasonably high. What is a level that you would be content with of having schools in red category in Wales? kirsty williams am: You're right. Schools will need different levels of support at different points, and sometimes, it's not because of a crisis. So, for instance, in my region, we do have an increase in the number of schools in the amber category. That's because we've seen in that particular region a number of headteachers retire because they've reached retirement age, and there are new headteachers. Nothing else has changed in that school, but the simple fact that you have a new leader, sometimes in those cases it might be their first headship. That means that that school is going to need a little bit of extra support, so it isn't always just a crisis that needs extra support, there are just general things that happen in the life of a school that could lead to it. But you're absolutely rightwe have a particular challenge in the secondary sector where we have not been able to move individual schools forward at pace. And 11 per cent is not acceptable to me, Huw, which is why we have introduced this new pilot to address those schools where, persistently, we have concerns about their ability to move forward. If we'd have carried on doing the same thing, I suspect we would have just carried on getting the same resulthence the need for a new approach to those schools that are causing concern. steve davies: Very briefly, the things we talked about earlier was how we measure the performance of schools, particularly at GCSEs, with a narrow focus. As was said earlier, some of these are the same groupsthey trip in and then they don't come out. Our belief is, from research, that they concentrate on squeezing the pips to get the grades up in some small areas for a period of time, and you can do that by targeting and immersing them. Estyn can tick the box to say your grades have got better, but we haven't handled the serious underpinning issuesleadership, teaching and learning, and bringing those together. As the Minister said, what does sustainable improvement look like in six, 12, 18 months? It isn't just, as important as they are, getting those exam grades up a bit. And if they're all agreed as the indicators at the outset, we're more likely. So it's multi-agency; it's not a little activity, it's a major strategy. In 2016, your election manifesto very clearly said that you wanted to abolish regional consortiathree words in it. Why haven't you done it? kirsty williams am: Because, given that you're such a keen student of my manifesto, you'll also know that hefin david am: It was only three words. kirsty williams am: The Liberal Democrat manifesto also said that we supported major local government reform and a major reduction in the number of local government units. I have to say genuinely, my experience over the last four years has proven to me the value of regional working, and in the absence of significant local government reform, I think it's absolutely vital that we have scale in school improvement servicesscale that I don't think can be delivered across 22 individual local authorities. kirsty williams am: I think if there was significant local government reform and we could demonstrate that those units had such a scale that they could perform the functions of regional consortia, then I think it would be inevitable that any education Minister would look to see whether there was an opportunity to change structures. But in the absence of that, Hefin, I have been absolutely convinced whilst doing this job that you need larger units to be able to carry out successful school improvement work, and I think it would be reckless to advocate the system going back to school improvement being organised in 22 different ways. Do you think that the work of the four consortia has been consistent and effective? kirsty williams am: The school improvement services? hefin david am: The four consortia. kirsty williams am: I think, as with individual local education authorities, there are some regional consortia services that have performed really highlyand that's not me saying that, that's Estyn, but gives us assurance around thatand there are others that need to improve. I think the consortia themselves would admit that they, since their establishment, have found new ways of working. Increasingly, over recent years, we have seen those consortia working together on a national approach, but delivered on a regional basis. But we are constantly looking for optimum delivery from those particular organisations, but as I said, I think it would be absolutely reckless to go back to a situation where school improvement services were being delivered individually on 22 different bases. I'm happy to accept that you've changed your opinion there; that's no problem at all. But with regard to the four consortia, and we'll take Education through Regional Working as an example, it does things differently to the other three. Is that a cause for concern, or do you think that's entirely appropriate? kirsty williams am: Well, ERW does things differently, but then so does the Education Achievement Service. What I'm interested in is not necessarily how they are constituted and organised, I'm interested in the effectiveness of that organisation to deliver for children and for teachers. ERW has got particular challenges, and we continue to work with those in ERW to address those, but increasingly, as I said, what we are seeing the regional consortia do is develop a national approach to school improvement services but deliver that on a regional basis so that there is greater consistency in terms of delivery. hefin david am: Are you happy that, within the ERW area, local authorities employ their own improvement advisers, rather than doing it in the way that the others do? kirsty williams am: We have discussed this at length with them. My preference would be for school improvement officers to be employed in the centre, and we continue to have those discussions, but what's really important to understand is that the regional consortia are not a beast of the Government; they are a beast of the local authorities that have worked together to create a school improvement service that meets their needs. So we can't impose that solution, and we continue to discuss with ERW what is the optimal way, and they continue to discuss with their constituent local authorities about how that should be organised. hefin david am: Are you concerned that Neath Port Talbot have given notice that they want to withdraw from regional working? kirsty williams am: I think it's really disappointing that Neath Port Talbot have published that notice. What's important for me is to understandnot for me, it will be important for Estyn. It will be really important for us to understand how Neath Port Talbot intend to support their schools and their teachers if they were to withdraw from ERW, especially at what is a very, very critical time. I would want to know from Neath Port Talbot how they are going to do that without being part of that organisation. And, of course, there's the added complexity that so much of our money is channelled through to schools via the regional consortia. So, I would want to understand from Neath Port Talbot how they're going to safeguard their schools and make sure that the children who are receiving their education in Neath Port Talbot are not disadvantaged if they were to follow through on that decision. hefin david am: Do you feel that it's your role to intervene in that area and instruct Neath Port Talbot and ERW as to how they should resolve this issue? kirsty williams am: Well, as I said, I would be seeking assurances hefin david am: What does that mean, though, 'seeking assurances'? kirsty williams am: Well, Neath Port Talbot would need to demonstrate to me how they're going to address these issues. If they're not part of ERW and their schools and their children are not going to be in receipt of the support from ERW, as I said, especially at this critical time, how are they intending to do that? I haven't seen those plans, but if they were to push forward and follow through on the notice, I would want to see them and I suspect Estyn would want to see them also. hefin david am: Okay, just last issue on that: you're just waiting to see what Neath Port Talbot do next, then. kirsty williams am: Well, we have written to Neath Port Talbot to ask them to demonstrate to us, if they were to pull out of ERW, how they're going to meet their functions. hefin david am: Steve, did you want to say something? steve davies: Obviously[Inaudible.]that point. Is that the current document? Are there plans to change or update it, or is that exactly where we stand? kirsty williams am: So, that is the current model. Some specific recommendations were put forward about additional services that could be organised on a regional basis; primarily, that is a specialist human resources resource. We know that, because of austerity in some local authorities, HR departments have been really stretched. So, a proposal was put forward to include specialist HR and governor support as part of the regional model. However, I must say, having presented that evidence, some of our local authorities, even though there wasn't a national agreement to put that into the national model, have pooled their resources, and those services are being delivered and supported on a regional basis. So, for instance, the Education Achievement Service now provide specialist HR resource, and EAS and Central South provide governor support. So, although we weren't successful in persuading local government to adopt a new national model, local authorities in those areas saw the value of moving that way. hefin david am: So, with that in mind, and perhaps I'll put this to Steve Davies, everything the Minister just said, and also the line in the document 'The implementation of this model will change over time' is it time to go back to that document and review it from a procedural point of view? steve davies: I don't think it's necessarily timely to go back and have a complete review of it. But, certainly, we are in ongoing discussions with the Welsh Local Government Association, both in terms of work with local authorities, and the type of intervention in schools. As the Minister touched on earlier, there is some work to get consistency across the current area, particularly, as we just mentioned, in relation to ERW work. I think what is emerging, as the Minister said, is that there are two regions who have already made this shift to pool services. I think the two other regions are seeing and will see the benefits of that, and instead of forcing it through, we'd expect that to evolve. hefin david am: And Professor Dylan Jones's strategic delivery group seems to have had quite a warm welcome in the sector. I'm very grateful to Dylan for his hard work and his skill in chairing that group, and I think it's been welcomed by all, so that we can get that clarity and consistency about the roles and responsibilities of the individual partners and players in the middle tier. hefin david am: And when will the work be completed, and what will the outcomes be? kirsty williams am: Well, the group is currently engaging with Steve and other officials on agreeing a plan, but also, crucially, that plan is there to support the successful implementation of the curriculum, so that we're very clear about the roles and responsibilities in the middle tier in this crucial phase following the publication. The history of devolution is full of fantastic documents, and, shall I say, patchy implementation.The work that has gone into that curriculum is too important for implementation to be left to chance. hefin david am: Yes, but I'm thinking that the strategic delivery is reviewing the role of the middle tier. So, you know, what do we expect to see from it, notwithstanding the kind of softly, softly approach that you've already talked about? steve davies: It was set up, actually, about 18 months agojust under. It was set up to build collectiveefficacy, because what people out there are seeing is that there's a confusion of roles, in what the regions are doing, and it was building that collective efficacy so everyone was behind the wheel. So, they've been looking at who is doing what for the last 18 months, and exploring and making some changes themselves. It's not just what they do with Government or what they do with each other; it's just happened that it's timely, because one of the key bits of feedback we believe we will get from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development is we have had co-construction, we'd had collective effort, but we need to do more, particularly within the middle tier. This is not controlled by Government, it is arm's length from Government, and it's not their job to get it ready for the new curriculumthat's a key part of it. It does feed back in to the Minister but there's no formal mechanism by which they have to report. What I'm about to say, I say it even though I'm a big localist: it all seems to be heading in one direction of a national service. Is the strategic group even thinking in these terms, obviously building in local accountability? But it'll just make it so much easier in terms of accountability and consistency to monitor what the middle tier does, if it's a national service, like the National Adoption Service. Local delivery, national serviceis it heading in that direction? kirsty williams am: That's not the intention of setting the group up. As Steve just said, I receive feedback from Dylan, because I meet Dylan in this particular capacity on a planned basis. He is there to give me advice on the middle tier, and to give me advice on what he thinks Welsh Government needs to do. sian gwenllian am: What I was going to raise has been answered already, that is that, from what I can see, the work that Professor Dylan Jones is doing has evolved somewhat. I felt that, originally, the idea was to look at the middle tier in terms of any kind of duplication that was happening, and where it was possible to tighten up the people going into schools from different directions. But it appears that it has evolved to be something that's much more than that, and that it is placing a focus on the curriculum and other aspects of the educational system. Is there a risk for them to lose focus in that sense? kirsty williams am: No, not at all. I think they are very, very clear around establishing roles and responsibilities for each of the players and to be very clear about the expectations that each part of the middle tier can have of each other, as to what they can expect from their partners in the middle tier. And absolutely, it is about making sure that there isn't duplication, that people aren't second-guessing each other's work, and there are clear demarcations about who does what in the system, and, as I said, knowing that you can rely on your colleague in the middle tier to do the bit that they are responsible for. We've got a lot of areas to cover so we are going to have to pick up our pace a bit. sian gwenllian am: Thinking about you as a Minister trying to see what the long-term trends are with regard to raising standards and improving educational attainment, is that difficult, because the performance measures have changed, haven't they? We can't compare like-for-like now, because of the changes that have been made in the way that performance is measured. So, to begin with, is that a challenge, to see whether progress has been made? And secondly, what evidence do you as Minister use to look at the long-term trends? kirsty williams am: The first thing to say, with regard to changes to performance measuresyou're right that change to those does make it, in some cases, more difficult to look at trends over a period of time. If we change a performance measure, it is done to ensure that it is in the best interests of learners. I understand that, for researchers and for opposition Members, even for Ministers, it would be simpler to have the same set of measures over a period of time. But if we know that those things are driving behaviours that are unhelpful to children, and not in the best interests of children, then we have to change them, even thought that then does create challenges in different areas. With regard to what do we look at, there are a number of ways that we gain data and look at data in the system: everything from the categorisation system we spoke of earlier, and trends in categorisation; we look at Estyn reports; we continue to look at examination results. But we're trying to develop a broader range of data and statistics that give us a whole picture of the education performance, rather than narrowing down on one simple indicator that tells you one thing but doesn't tell you everything. But I don't know, Steve, if there's anything further that you'd like to add. steve davies: It's going back to what the Member raised earlier, in terms of the range of things that you look atthings that can make a difference. So, when Estyn review schools, or we're looking to develop national frameworks for things like mental health and well-being, which look to the practice that enables raising standards, it's collecting that information, both at a national level, through the annual review of Estyn, as well as our engagement with regions and local authorities. And, inevitably, we will use the Programme for International Student Assessment, and any other external assessments that come through organisations like the OECD. And even where we've changed the performance measures, we still have, at national level, the ongoing data. So, if you looked at level 2 plus, we believe it is important that children get five good GCSEsfor higher education and for employment. So, we've not lost sight of those at a national levelwe're not using them as a narrow set of performance measures for individual schools. kirsty williams am: So, if we look atlevel 2 plus is a good example. We know that a relentless focus on that single measure, as a way of judging the system, leads to a set of behaviours in schools. It narrows the focus onto a certain part of the cohort, it narrows the curriculum, when we know that children sian gwenllian am: I'm not challenging the fact that you've changed the performance measuresI understand that, and having a broader way of looking is better in the long run. I'm just saying, because there's been this change, it makes it more of a challengewhilst accepting why you've made the changes, but it does present more of a challenge, presumably, because you have to look at more indicators, and take evidence from different places. But those changes are being made for the right reasons, as I said, whether that be at level 2 plus. I understand why perhaps a performance measure around English was introduced, but the effect of that was that significant numbers of childrenand, it must be said, usually children who are entitled to free school mealswere suddenly not sitting English literature GCSE. We've changed that performance measure, and guess what? Last year, we saw a significant increase in the number of children that were sitting English literature GCSE. For standards of literacy and oracy, I think studying literature is really, really important, before we even get into the joy of introducing children to the written word and the love of reading. Yes, it causes challenges, but we're making those changes because we believe that they are in the best interest of children, and that has to trump ease of comparison. sian gwenllian am: Why have you decided to ask the consortia, Estyn and so on not to report on local data or regional level data? How do we then come to conclusions about what is working if it isn't presented on a local authority and regional basis? kirsty williams am: Well, I think the thing to say about the communications fromWelsh Government, Estyn, and the WLGA is it's not about not communicating the data, it's about challenging people on how that data should be used. So, the data is still available, but it's a challenge to them about how to use that data. So, for instance, when we're presenting data that compares local authority to local authority, you could have a local authority that says, 'There we go, I'm above the national average. I don't need to worry about the education in my local authority, because I'm above the average, or I'm better than my neighbour.' That doesn't necessarily mean that everything is right in your local education authority. So, actually, it's not about hiding data; it's about how you use the data appropriately. And sometimes, how we were presenting data in the past was lulling some people into a false sense of security about the performance of their system. So, it's about how you use data, and that's what the communication from Welsh Government and the WLGA and Estyn was about: think very carefully about this data and what it's telling you about your system, and don't be lulled into a false sense of security that you may be doing brilliantly. Or, perhaps, looking at your data, you may think, 'Oh, my goodness me, we're not doing very well at all', but, actually, more careful consideration of that might show that your school's impact on those children is really, really a positive one. If anything, it's about more data and, crucially for me, it's about more intelligent use and interrogation of that data, about truly what it's telling you about your system. So, doesn't that contradict what you've been telling the consortia and everyone else? kirsty williams am: No, not at all. As I said, we're not in the business of trying to hide dataI believe absolutely in full transparency. And in terms of level 2 data, I think I'm not moving away from the point that I think it's really important that more and more children get five really good GCSEs. steve davies: Can I, very briefly? We didn't just send a letter out collectively. We've now carried out training jointly with WLGA and Estyn on how to use that data. So, it's not just looking where your LA is; it's also not looking at whether your school's better than average for the authority. And it is well received, and it should broaden the approach of scrutiny committees to beyond what historically was, if I'm honest, looking at the league table for their authority or looking at the league table of local authorities. It's not that they shouldn't be looking at that, but they need to dig much, much deeper underneath it. I'm going to appeal for brief questions and brief answers so that we can cover the rest of the questions. What are they telling you about the success you've had in trying to avoid the bad behaviour?Short answers. [Laughter.] I think it's inevitable: whatever kind of measures we put in place, people will look to maximise their success in those measures, and I don't think we'll ever come up with a system where those measures are absolutely perfect. What's really important to me is that we're really, really, really challenging schools to look at the performance of all of their children, rather than just at a very, very narrow cohort around those C/D boundaries, which we knew was detrimental, potentially, to more able and talented children and really pushing those Bs to As and those As to A*s, and children for whom actually just getting in to school on a daily basis is an achievement, and the school has done well to provide that. So, our new capped 9 makes sure that there is breadth across a range of subjects, rather than just focusing on a narrower and narrower bunch of subject opportunities for children, and our new third-third-third system enables schools to really look at their performance. So if their capped 9 score is high, what's driving that? Is it because the bottom third of the cohort is doing really well, and the impact on those children is above and beyond what could be expected, but actually, you're not doing very well for your more able and talented; you're not pushing them on? Alternatively, maybe your capped 9 score is because your MAT children are doing incredibly well, but actually, you're not really making the progress for the middle tier of those children. It allows us to have a greater focus on the performance of our FSM childrenwhere they really are within that system. And crucially for me, it looks at the impact for every child, because every child has to matter in the system, and what we had before was a narrowing of curriculum choice and a narrowing on a certain cohort of children. suzy davies am: So are the permanent measures likely to be pretty similar to what you've got now? Because the researchI don't know if the research is complete yet. When will you be publishing the new permanent evaluation? kirsty williams am: Sue, you're right: they're interim measures at the moment, and we will need to make sure that the performance measures are aligned to the new curriculum. Because Wales's review of qualifications potentially has an impact on what those finally will look like, so that work is ongoing at the moment, and unless Steve can tell me off the top of his head when we expect that to be completed by, I will send you a note. It's what's wrapped around those interim measures that I touched on earlier: the other evidence that we bring to bear about the effectiveness of a school, but we do want to say to schools that on the whole, broadly speaking, the interim measures will carry on for two, three years. suzy davies am: Okay, and the reason I asked that is right at the beginning of this session, the Minister said to the Chair that this 100 million that's going into school improvements will be going into things that work. We need some evidence that the interim measures are going to work as well, so when are they going to be evaluated? steve davies: Well, we've only just used them for one year. steve davies: We've signalled that they're only going to be in place for three years. We are carrying out our own review of the impact of those and that's been built in, but I expect the OECD reportbecause it is an extensive reportto give us feedback on how those things are working now, and some steer, as they did with the last report, as to the direction we would want to go into. kirsty williams am: And what I'm also interested in is those performance management measures around schools. Yes, they're about outcomes for children, but actually are about a broader suite of behaviours within that school, so, yes, qualifications and grades are an important part of a performance measure, but actually, I have other expectations of schools, above and beyond simply qualifications. And so, we would want our permanent set of performance measures to look at a wider set of behaviours within a school, and I think because. Exams are importantof course they are, qualifications are importantbut the way in which those schools achieve those results are also important. lynne neagle am: Would you anticipate that including well-being, then? suzy davies am: In a whole-school approach. kirsty williams am: I absolutelyand we need to find a wayof how we can truly measure that. Sometimes, children's well-being is influenced by lots of things outside the control of a school. So, I don't want schools to be held accountable for things that they have no control over, because of the circumstances in which a child may be living. But, absolutely: well-being and how the culture of the school addresses well-being is really important to me. suzy davies am: How useful is PISA for you in helping school improvement? I know that it's not always the thing that you enjoy watching or looking out for. But, genuinely, how useful is it? kirsty williams am: It is one of a range of tools that we need to look at. PISA is one thing where there is a level of consistency, so it will continue to be, I think, an important part of how we test how our system is doing. suzy davies am: We know that you are a little bit encouraged, but we are not out of the woods yet. How confident are you that we are on track for meeting these targets that were set before your time, or do you think that having those targets is helpful? Is it setting up aspirations that are incapable of being met within a period of time? kirsty williams am: Well, those long-term targets of a score around 500 are part of 'Our National Mission', and we have to keep the pressure on to strive. If we look at reading scores for girls, we are almost there, but that just demonstrates what a journey we've got with our boys to address. For me, one of the ways in which we will reach those targets and achieve them is further progress on our more able and talented children. Although we are now performing at an OECD average, I will be the first person to admit that, although we have seen an improvement in the higher level skills of our more able and talented children, we do not perform at an OECD average with regard to those level 6 and level 5 scores. That's one of the reasons why we have introduced a more able and talented budget to support that, and our Seren programme, which is delivering fantastic results post-16. That's why we're introducing the principles of Seren earlier into children's careers, bringing it down from year 9 upwards, to be able to drive improvements. So, I think that that's the area that we are particularly keen to work on: making sure that more of our children perform at the OECD average at level 5 and level 6. We are working with southern Ireland, who have consistently done well with reading scores, to look to see what lessons we can learn to press on with there with reading. Does that mean that the focus will then drift slightly from maths, where there has been some success; and drift from science, where the encouragement of more people to take GCSE science has reduced the number of high-level passes? kirsty williams am: First, we have to have a system that is capable of doing all of those of things at the same time. We can't accept a system that says, 'Well, we can do a bit over here, but that means we have to.' We have to have a system, Suzy, that can drive improvements at all levels. As I've said, it's far from perfect, and we've got more work to do, but we have to deliver across all three domains, as we did last time. It was a travesty that there were children who never had the opportunity to sit a science GCSE. We don't have to make assumptions about the nature of many, many, many of those children. We have seen a significant increase in the number of children who are having the opportunity to sit GCSE science and who are passing GCSE science. One of the reasons that I suspect we have ended up with poor science scores is because of the previous policy around science entries and science qualifications. Again, one of the reasons that we have changed it isn't just solely because we need to do better in PISA, but I think that by changing it, we will see an impact on PISA. sian gwenllian am: I just want to discuss an issue that I know is important to you, namely closing the attainment gap between pupils who are eligible for free school meals and those who are not eligible for free school meals. We are not where we need to be in terms of the performance, not only of our children on free school meals, but the performance of our looked-after children, and the performance of some children from some ethnic minority groups. So, we will continue to look to support those learners in a variety of ways, again looking to amend our practice on the basis of evidence that is given to us from our experts who are there to advise us. There has been some progress in some areas, but it is not where I would want it to be. sian gwenllian am: But, this is despite the fact that there is 475 million that has been invested in the pupil development grant, for this exact purpose of closing the attainment gap. kirsty williams am: Well, I think that, as I said, I am not shying away from any assumption or declaration that we need to do better. If we go back to look at what PISA has said about our performance, the PISA results show that pupils in Wales are relatively more able to overcome the disadvantage of their background than is the average in OECD countries. If we look at pupils who are eligible for free school meals, they do score below their better-off counterparts in PISA by some 34 points. It's difficult to make comparisons because of all the reasons we have talked about, but if we look back to 2006 and we look at the very basic level of qualifications, which is a level 1 qualification, we have seen a jump from 9.4 per cent of children in 2006 achieving a level 1 qualification to over 18 per cent. We need to get this right for those children, the moment that they come into a nursery and the moment that they start their formal education at the age of 5. Providing catch-up, of course, we need to do for those kids; we can't throw those year 10s and year 11s to the wind. sian gwenllian am: But I'm sure that that is a disappointment to you, because it has been a personal priority for you as well. In terms of minority ethnic learners, while there are some groups within that category who are achieving, there is underachievement happening here as well, isn't there? It's not consistent across the minority ethnic group. Is that something that you will be focusing upon? kirsty williams am: Yes, and that's why we have committed to maintaining a ring-fenced grant to local authorities of some 10 million, to support education of our minority ethnic children. We need a much more sophisticated conversation about what is really going on in attainment across minority ethnic groups so that we can best target that resource and have a conversation about what the differences are. If we look at black Welsh girls entitled to free school meals, they perform almost at the national average for all childrennot FSM children; the national average for all children. So, there is a really complex picture here, and I really welcome a debate about acknowledging the various levels of performance of BAME children, and where the gaps in performance lie. I'm committed to continuing to support educational opportunities, and that's why have ring-fenced the minority ethnic achievement grant. lynne neagle am: Sin, this will need to be the last question, I'm afraid. sian gwenllian am: Sorry? lynne neagle am: This is going to have to be the last question. In terms of looked-after children, which is one of the groups where attainment isn't where we would like it to be, there was some improvement in 2016 at key stage 4, but it has been disappointing. Do we know what's been happening in 2019? kirsty williams am: The 2019 data will be published next month, and there has been significant activity. You are right: in recent years, the data have been poor and not where we would want it to be. That's why we have had a reformed approach to PDG LAC; the employment of PDG LAC co-ordinators across the regions. We've identified new resource in the new financial year to test new approaches, so, for instance, virtual school approaches, where we know, in other systems, that has worked. But, we expect the next set of data around the performance of this particular group of learners in March. We have come to the end of our time, so can I thank you, Minister, and your official for attending this morning? We have had a wide-ranging and very detailed discussion that will be very useful for the committee. As usual, you will be sent a transcript following the meeting to check for accuracy, but thank you again, both of you, for your attendance this morning. Paper to note 1 is a letter from ERW providing additional information following the evidence session on 16 January. Paper to note 2 is a letter from Central South Consortium, similarly providing additional information following the evidence session. Paper to note 3 is a letter from the Noah's Ark Children's Hospital for Wales regarding children's rights in Wales, following up on some additional information there. Paper to note 4 is a letter from Qualifications Wales, providing additional information following the annual report scrutiny session in January. Can I propose, in accordance with Standing Order 17.42, that the committee resolves to meet in private for the remainder of the meeting? Are Members content? Thank you.
phd e: Ah grad f: Wh - what causes the crash ? phd a: Did you fix something ? phd c: Hello . grad f: Oh , maybe it 's the turning turning off and turning on of the mike , right ? professor b: you think that 's you ? Oh . phd e: Mmm , channel five ? Doesn't work ? professor b: Yeah , that 's the mike number there , mike number five , and channel channel four . So  I also copied  the results that we all got in the mail I think from  from OGI and we 'll go go through them also . phd d: The PLP , the PLP with JRASTA , the MSG , and the MFCC from the baseline Aurora . We 've trained  several neural networks on so on the TI - digits English and on the Italian data and also on the broad  English  French and  Spanish databases . Mmm , so there 's our result tables here , for the tandem approach , and  , actually what we we @ @ observed is that if the network is trained on the task data it works pretty well . Our our  There 's a We 're pausing for a photo phd c: Chicken on the grill . phd a: How about over th from the front of the room ? phd c: Yeah , it 's longer . And  actually we have  , results are similar Only on , phd a: Do you mean if it 's trained only on On data from just that task , phd d: yeah . But actually we didn't train network on  both types of data   phonetically ba phonetically balanced  data and task data . So , professor b: So how  clearly it 's gonna be good then phd a: So what 's th professor b: but the question is how much worse is it if you have broad data ?  , my assump From what I saw from the earlier results ,  I guess last week , was that  , if you trained on one language and tested on another , say , that the results were were relatively poor . professor b: But but the question is if you train on one language but you have a broad coverage and then test in another , does that is that improve things i c in comparison ? phd d: If we use the same language ? professor b: No , no , no . Different lang So  If you train on TI - digits and test on Italian digits , you do poorly , let 's say . professor b: I don't have the numbers in front of me , phd d: But Yeah but I did not  do that . E So , you didn't train on TIMIT and test on on Italian digits , say ? phd d: We No , we did four four kind of of testing , actually . The second test is trained on a single language  with broad database , but the same language as the t task data . The third test is by using ,  the three language database professor b: W which in phd d: and the fourth is professor b: It has three languages . That 's including the w the the phd d: This includes professor b: the one that it 's phd d: Yeah . phd d: Yeah And the fourth test is  excluding from these three languages the language that is the task language . So  for  TI - digits for ins example  when we go from TI - digits training to TIMIT training  we lose  around ten percent ,  . And then when we jump to the multilingual data it 's  it become worse and , well Around  , let 's say , twenty perc twenty percent further . phd d: But the first step is al already removing the task s specific from from phd a: Already , right right right . phd a: So they were sort of building here ? phd d: And we lose phd a: OK ? phd d: Yeah .  So , basically when it 's trained on the the multilingual broad data  or number so , the the ratio of our error rates  with the baseline error rate is around  one point one . professor b: I i if you compare everything to the first case at the baseline , you get something like one point one for the for the using the same language but a different task , and something like one point three for three three languages broad stuff . phd d: Tas - task data professor b: I I I meant something different by baseline phd d: we are u Yeah . professor b: So if we call a factor of w just one , just normalized to one , the word error rate that you have for using TI - digits as as training and TI - digits as test , phd d: Mmm . professor b: If we call that " one " , then what you 're saying is that the word error rate for the same language but using  different training data than you 're testing on , say TIMIT and so forth , it 's one point one . professor b: you do go to three languages including the English , it 's something like one point three . professor b: And if you exclude English , from this combination , what 's that ? phd d: If we exclude English ,  there is not much difference with the data with English . So what what it 's saying here is just that " yes , there is a reduction in performance , when you don't  have the s when you don't have  phd a: Task data . So it 's So when you go to a different task , there 's actually not so different . It 's when you went to these So what 's the difference between two and three ? Between the one point one case and the one point four case ? I 'm confused . The only difference it 's is that it 's multilingual  professor b: Cuz in both in both both of those cases , you don't have the same task . professor b: So is is the training data for the for this one point four case does it include the training data for the one point one case ? phd d:  yeah . professor b: How m how much bigger is it ? phd d:  It 's two times , grad f: Yeah ,  . professor b: So it 's two times , but it includes the but it includes the broad English data . professor b: So you have band - limited TIMIT , gave you  almost as good as a result as using TI - digits on a TI - digits test . OK ? phd d:  ? professor b:  and  But , when you add in more training data but keep the neural net the same size , it  performs worse on the TI - digits . OK , now all of this is This is noisy TI - digits , I assume ? Both training and test ? phd d:  professor b: Yeah . We we we may just need to  So  it 's interesting that h going to a different different task didn't seem to hurt us that much , and going to a different language  It doesn't seem to matter The difference between three and four is not particularly great , so that means that whether you have the language in or not is not such a big deal . professor b: It sounds like   we may need to have more of  things that are similar to a target language or  . You have the same number of parameters in the neural net , you haven't increased the size of the neural net , and maybe there 's just just not enough complexity to it to represent the variab increased variability in the in the training set .  So , what about So these are results with  th that you 're describing now , that they are pretty similar for the different features or or  phd d: let me check . For the PLP with JRASTA the the we This is quite the same tendency , with a slight increase of the error rate ,  if we go to to TIMIT . There there is a difference actually with b between PLP and JRASTA is that JRASTA seems to perform better with the highly mismatched condition but slightly slightly worse for the well matched condition . professor b: I have a suggestion , actually , even though it 'll delay us slightly , would would you mind running into the other room and making copies of this ? Cuz we 're all sort of If we c if we could look at it , while we 're talking , I think it 'd be phd d: Yeah , yeah . professor b: I 'll I 'll sing a song or dance or something while you do it , too . phd a: The  What was Was this number forty or It was roughly the same as this one , he said ? When you had the two language versus the three language ? professor b:  . That 's interesting because it it seems like what it 's saying is not so much that you got hurt  because you  didn't have so much representation of English , because in the other case you don't get hurt any more , at least when it seemed like  it it might simply be a case that you have something that is just much more diverse , phd a:   I wonder were  all three of these nets using the same output ? This multi - language  labelling ? grad f: He was using  sixty - four phonemes from SAMPA . phd a: So this would From this you would say , " well , it doesn't really matter if we put Finnish into the training of the neural net , if there 's gonna be , you know , Finnish in the test data . " Right ? professor b: Well , it 's it sounds  , we have to be careful , cuz we haven't gotten a good result yet . professor b: But I I I I think it does suggest that it 's not so much   cross language as cross type of speech . professor b: It 's it 's  But we did Oh yeah , the other thing I was asking him , though , is that I think that in the case Yeah , you you do have to be careful because of com compounded results . I think we got some earlier results in which you trained on one language and tested on another and you didn't have three , but you just had one language . Didn - Wasn't there something of that ? Where you , say , trained on Spanish and tested on on TI - digits , or the other way around ? Something like that ? phd e: No . professor b: This may have been what I was asking before , Stephane , but but , wasn't there something that you did , where you trained on one language and tested on another ?  no no mixture but just grad f: I 'll get it for you . professor b: We 've never just trained on one lang phd d: Training on a single language , you mean , and testing on the other one ? professor b: Yeah . phd d: So the only task that 's similar to this is the training on two languages , and that professor b: But we 've done a bunch of things where we just trained on one language . Either thi this is test with  the same language but from the broad data , or it 's test with  different languages also from the broad data , excluding the So , it 's it 's three or three and four . phd e: The early experiment that phd a: Did you do different languages from digits ? phd d:  . You mean training digits on one language and using the net to recognize on the other ? phd a: Digits on another language ? phd d: No . professor b:  What phd c: These numbers are  ratio to baseline ? professor b: So ,  wha what 's the phd d: So . professor b: This this chart this table that we 're looking at is  , show is all testing for TI - digits , or ? grad f: Bigger is worse . phd d: The upper part is for TI - digits grad f: Yeah , yeah , yeah . phd d: And the first four rows is well - matched , then the s the second group of four rows is mismatched , and finally highly mismatched . professor b: Well , What was is that i What was it that you had done last week when you showed Do you remember ? Wh - when you showed me the your table last week ? phd d: It - It was part of these results . phd a: So where is the baseline for the TI - digits located in here ? phd d: You mean the HTK Aurora baseline ? phd a: Yeah . professor b:   let 's see PLP  with on - line normalization and delta - del so that 's this thing you have circled here in the second column , phd d: Yeah . Actually I I  forgot to say that the multilingual net are trained on  features without the s derivatives  but with increased frame numbers . And we can we can see on the first line of the table that it it it 's slightly slightly worse when we don't use delta but it 's not not that much . What 's MF , MS and ME ? phd a: Multi - French , Multi - Spanish phd d: So . professor b: OK so I think what I 'm what I saw in your smaller chart that I was thinking of was was there were some numbers I saw , I think , that included these multiple languages and it and I was seeing that it got worse . In fact it might have been just this last category , having two languages broad that were where where English was removed . What I we hadn't seen yet was that if you added in the English , it 's still poor . professor b:   now , what 's the noise condition  of the training data phd d: Still poor . The noise condition is the same It 's the same  Aurora noises  , in all these cases for the training . professor b: So there 's not a statistical sta a strong st statistically different noise characteristic between  the training and test phd d: No these are the s s s same noises , professor b: and yet we 're seeing some kind of effect phd d: yeah . At least at least for the first for the well - matched , grad f: Well matched condition . professor b: So there 's some kind of a a an effect from having these  this broader coverage  Now I guess what we should try doing with this is try testing these on u this same sort of thing on you probably must have this lined up to do . So what appears is that perhaps Spanish is not very close to Italian because  , well , when using the the network trained only on Spanish it 's the error rate is almost  twice the baseline error rate . Is there any difference in So it 's in the  So you 're saying that when you train on English and  and and test on phd d: Yeah . professor b: No , you don't have training on English testing phd d: There there is another difference , is that the noise the noises are different . professor b: In in what ? phd d: Well , For for the Italian part  the  the  networks are trained with noise from Aurora TI - digits , phd e: Aurora - two . professor b: Do we have any  test sets  in any other language that  have the same noise as in the Aurora ? phd d: And phd e: Mmm , no . phd a: Can I ask something real quick ? In in the upper part in the English stuff , it looks like the very best number is sixty point nine ? and that 's in the  the third section in the upper part under PLP JRASTA , sort of the middle column ? phd d: Yeah . phd a: So that 's matched training ? Is that what that is ? phd d: It 's no , the third part , so it 's  highly mismatched . phd a: So why do you get your best number in Wouldn't you get your best number in the clean case ? phd c: Well , it 's relative to the  baseline mismatching phd d: Yeah . And then so , in the in the  in the non - mismatched clean case , your best one was under MFCC ? That sixty - one point four ? phd d: Yeah . But , what is  what is currently running , that 's  , i that just filling in the holes here or or ? pretty much ? phd d: no we don't plan to fill the holes professor b: OK . phd d: but actually there is something important , is that  we made a lot of assumption concerning the on - line normalization and we just noticed  recently that  the approach that we were using was not  leading to very good results when we used the straight features to HTK . So basically d if you look at the at the left of the table , the first  row , with eighty - six , one hundred , and forty - three and seventy - five , these are the results we obtained for Italian  with straight mmm , PLP features using on - line normalization . And the , mmm what 's in the table , just at the left of the PLP twelve on - line normalization column , so , the numbers seventy - nine , fifty - four and  forty - two are the results obtained by  Pratibha with  his on - line normalization  her on - line normalization approach . phd a: Where is that ? seventy - nine , fifty professor b: it 's just sort of sitting right on the  the column line . So these are the results of OGI with on - line normalization and straight features to HTK . And the previous result , eighty - six and so on , are with our features straight to HTK . phd d: So what we see that is there is that   the way we were doing this was not correct , but still the networks are very good . professor b: So , do you know what was wrong with the on - line normalization , or ? phd d: Yeah . There were diff there were different things and basically , the first thing is the mmm , alpha  value . I assume that this was not important because  previous results from from Dan and show that basically the both both values g give the same same  results . Actually ,  what we were doing is to start the recursion from the beginning of the utterance . phd d: And Pratibha did something different is that he  she initialed the  values of the mean and variance by computing this on the twenty - five first frames of each utterance . There were other minor differences , the fact that she used fifteen dissities instead s instead of thirteen , and that she used C - zero instead of log energy .  , I changed the code  and now we have a baseline that 's similar to the OGI baseline . phd d: We It it 's slightly  different because I don't exactly initialize the same way she does . Actually I start , mmm , I don't wait to a fifteen twenty - five twenty - five frames before computing a mean and the variance to e to to start the recursion . phd d: I I use the on - line scheme and only start the re recursion after the twenty - five twenty - fifth frame . So  I retrained the networks with these well , the the the networks are retaining with these new features . phd d: So basically what I expect is that these numbers will a little bit go down but perhaps not not so much professor b: Right . It it will learn how to normalize and professor b: OK , but I think that given the pressure of time we probably want to draw because of that especially , we wanna draw some conclusions from this , do some reductions in what we 're looking at , phd d: Yeah . professor b: and make some strong decisions for what we 're gonna do testing on before next week . So do you are you w did you have something going on , on the side , with  multi - band or on on this , phd d: Yeah I professor b: or ? phd d: No , I we plan to start this  so , act actually we have discussed  @ @  , these what we could do more as a as a research and and we were thinking perhaps that  the way we use the tandem is not  , well , there is basically perhaps a flaw in the in the the stuff because we trained the networks If we trained the networks on the on a language and a t or a specific task , professor b:   phd d: what we ask is to the network is to put the bound the decision boundaries somewhere in the space . phd d: And  mmm and ask the network to put one , at one side of the for for a particular phoneme at one side of the boundary decision boundary and one for another phoneme at the other side . And so there is kind of reduction of the information there that 's not correct because if we change task and if the phonemes are not in the same context in the new task , obviously the decision boundaries are not should not be at the same place . professor b: I di phd d: But the way the feature gives The the way the network gives the features is that it reduce completely the it removes completely the information a lot of information from the the features by   placing the decision boundaries at optimal places for one kind of data but this is not the case for another kind of data . professor b: It 's a trade - off , phd d: So professor b: right ? Any - anyway go ahead . So  what we were thinking about is perhaps  one way to solve this problem is increase the number of outputs of the neural networks .  , I I think you could make the same argument , it 'd be just as legitimate , for hybrid systems as well . phd d: Yeah but , we know that professor b: And in fact , th things get better with context dependent versions . professor b: Yeah , but it 's still true that what you 're doing is you 're ignoring you 're you 're coming up with something to represent , whether it 's a distribution , probability distribution or features , you 're coming up with a set of variables that are representing  , things that vary w over context . So , for that reason , when you in in in a hybrid system , when you incorporate context one way or another , you do get better scores . I I 'm I 'm sort of And once you the other thing is that once you represent start representing more and more context it is  much more  specific to a particular task in language . So   , the the acoustics associated with  a particular context , for instance you may have some kinds of contexts that will never occur in one language and will occur frequently in the other , so the qu the issue of getting enough training for a particular kind of context becomes harder . We already actually don't have a huge amount of training data  phd d: Yeah , but mmm , the the way we we do it now is that we have a neural network and basically the net network is trained almost to give binary decisions . professor b: It 's and and it is true that if there 's two phones that are very similar , that  the i it may prefer one but it will give a reasonably high value to the other , too . Yeah , sure but  So basically it 's almost binary decisions and  the idea of using more classes is to get something that 's less binary decisions . Because then you would say that in that this phone in this context is a one , but the same phone in a slightly different context is a zero . phd d: But yeah , but professor b: That would be even even more distinct of a binary decision . phd d: Yeah , but if professor b:  for instance , the the thing I was arguing for before , but again which I don't think we have time to try , is something in which you would modify the code so you could train to have several outputs on and use articulatory features phd d: Mmm . professor b: cuz then that would that would go that would be much broader and cover many different situations . Yeah , but I think Yeah , perhaps you 're right , but you have more classes so you you have more information in your features . phd d: because it 's it 's information that helps to discriminate , professor b:   phd d: if it 's possible to be able to discriminate among the phonemes in context . phd d: But the professor b:  we we could disagree about it at length phd d: Mmm . professor b: but the the real thing is if you 're interested in it you 'll probably try it phd d: Mmm . But but what I 'm more concerned with now , as an operational level , is  , you know , phd d: Mmm . professor b: what do we do in four or five days ?  , and so we have to be concerned with Are we gonna look at any combinations of things , you know once the nets get retrained so you have this problem out of it . professor b: are we going to look at multi - band ? Are we gonna look at combinations of things ?  , what questions are we gonna ask ,  now that , we should probably turn shortly to this O G I note .  , how are we going to combine with what they 've been focusing on ?  ,  we haven't been doing any of the L D A RASTA sort of thing . professor b: And they , although they don't talk about it in this note , there 's  , the issue of the  Mu law business  versus the logarithm , so . professor b: So what i what is going on right now ? What 's right you 've got nets retraining , Are there is there are there any H T K trainings testings going on ? phd d: N phd e: I I I 'm trying the HTK with eh , PLP twelve on - line delta - delta and MSG filter together .  professor b: And is this with the revised on - line normalization ? phd e: Ye -  , with the old older , phd d: Yeah . professor b: but again we have the hope that it We have the hope that it maybe it 's not making too much difference , phd e: Yeah . Well , something using place of articulation which which leads to nine , I think , broad classes . And then , something that combine both , and we have twenty f twenty - five ? grad f: Twenty - seven . professor b: So what you do  I just wanna understand phd d:  For the moments we do not don't have nets , professor b: so You have two net or three nets ? Was this ? How many how many nets do you have ? No nets . phd d: It 's just Were we just changing the labels to retrain nets with fewer out outputs . So you 're having multiple nets and combining them , or ?  , how are you how are you coming up with If you say  If you have a place characteristic and a manner characteristic , how do you phd d: It - It 's the single net , phd a: I think they have one output . grad f:  -  phd d: if we have twenty - seven classes , professor b: I see . professor b: So you 're sort of going the other way of what you were saying a bit ago instead of yeah . I think it will get worse because Well , I believe the effect that of of too reducing too much the information is basically basically what happens professor b:  - huh . phd d: and professor b: But you think if you include that plus the other features , phd d: but Yeah , because there is perhaps one important thing that the net brings , and OGI show showed that , is the distinction between sp speech and silence Because these nets are trained on well - controlled condition . So this is one thing And But perhaps , something intermediary using also some broad classes could could bring so much more information . professor b: And then  , just to remind me , all of that goes into  , that all of that is transformed by  , K - KL or something , or ? phd d:   phd d: or  , phd e: No transform the PLP phd d: per phd e: and only transform the other I 'm not sure . professor b: Well no , phd d: This is still something that professor b: I think I see . phd d: yeah , we don't know professor b: So there 's a question of whether you would phd e: Two e @ @ it 's one . So that 's something that you 're you haven't trained yet but are preparing to train , and phd d: Yeah . professor b: So I think , you know , we need to choose the choose the experiments carefully , so we can get  key key questions answered  before then phd d:   professor b: and leave other ones aside even if it leaves incomplete tables someplace , it 's it 's really time to time to choose .  professor b: OK , so  , Something I asked So they 're they 're doing the the VAD I guess they mean voice activity detection So again , it 's the silence So they 've just trained up a net which has two outputs , I believe .  I asked  Hynek whether I haven't talked to Sunil I asked Hynek whether they compared that to just taking the nets we already had and summing up the probabilities . To get the speech voice activity detection , or else just using the silence , if there 's only one silence output . But on the other hand , maybe they can get by with a smaller net and maybe sometimes you don't run the other , maybe there 's a computational advantage to having a separate net , anyway . professor b: there 's a an example or two that you can find , where it made it slightly worse , but  in in all but a couple examples .  how are trained the the LDA filter ? How obtained the LDA filter ? phd d: Mmm . phd e: Yeah ,  for example , LDA filter need a set of a set of training to obtain the filter . phd e: And maybe for the Italian , for the TD TE on for Finnish , these filter are are obtained with their own training set . That 's that 's so that 's a that 's a very good question , then now that it I understand it . It 's " yeah , where does the LDA come from ? " In the In earlier experiments , they had taken LDA from a completely different database , right ? phd e: Yeah . Yeah , because maybe it the same situation that the neural network training with their own phd d: Mmm .  , but  to tell you the truth , I wasn't actually looking at the LDA so much when I I was looking at it I was mostly thinking about the the VAD . And  , it ap it ap Oh what does what does ASP ? Oh that 's phd d: The features , yeah . phd e: what is what is the difference between ASP and  baseline over ? phd c: ASP . professor b: And it 's This is mostly better than baseline , although in some cases it 's a little worse , in a couple cases . professor b: I think this was I think this is the same point we were at when when we were up in Oregon . phd d: I think I think it 's the C - zero using C - zero instead of log energy . phd a: They s they say in here that the VAD is not used as an additional feature . professor b: Shouldn't it be phd d: Because phd a: Does does anybody know how they 're using it ? professor b: Yeah . professor b: if you look down at the block diagram , they estimate they get a they get an estimate of whether it 's speech or silence , phd a: But that professor b: and then they have a median filter of it . professor b: You find stretches where the combination of the frame wise VAD and the the median filter say that there 's a stretch of silence . professor b: Right ? So  phd a: So it 's it 's I don't understand . You mean it 's throwing out frames ? Before professor b: It 's throwing out chunks of frames , yeah . There 's the the median filter is enforcing that it 's not gonna be single cases of frames , or isolated frames . professor b: So it 's throwing out frames and the thing is  , what I don't understand is how they 're doing this with H T phd a: Yeah , that 's what I was just gonna ask . professor b: This is phd a: How can you just throw out frames ? professor b: Yeah . Well , you you can , phd d: i professor b: right ?  y you you phd d: Yeah . Yeah , so  in the i i in the in the decoding , you 're saying that we 're gonna decode from here to here . professor b: I think they 're they 're they 're treating it , you know , like  well , it 's not isolated word , but but connected , you know , the the phd a: In the text they say that this this is a tentative block diagram of a possible configuration we could think of . No they they have numbers though , right ? So I think they 're they 're doing something like that . I think that they 're they 're I think what  by tha that is they 're trying to come up with a block diagram that 's plausible for the standard . In other words , it 's   from the point of view of of  reducing the number of bits you have to transmit it 's not a bad idea to detect silence anyway . I 'm just wondering what exactly did they do up in this table if it wasn't this . But it 's the thing is it 's that that that 's that 's I I Certainly it would be tricky about it intrans in transmitting voice ,   for listening to , is that these kinds of things  cut speech off a lot . professor b: It does introduce delays but they 're claiming that it 's it 's within the the boundaries of it . professor b: And the LDA introduces delays , and b what he 's suggesting this here is a parallel path so that it doesn't introduce  , any more delay . I it introduces two hundred milliseconds of delay but at the same time the LDA down here I don't know Wh what 's the difference between TLDA and SLDA ? phd c: Temporal and spectral . The temporal LDA does in fact include the same so that I think he well , by by saying this is a b a tentative block di diagram I think means if you construct it this way , this this delay would work in that way phd a: Ah . So  I think that it 's it 's nice to do that in this because in fact , it 's gonna give a better word error result and therefore will help within an evaluation .  , as you know , part of the problem with evaluation right now is that the word models are pretty bad and nobody wants has has approached improving them . So it 's possible that a lot of the problems with so many insertions and so forth would go away if they were better word models to begin with . So  The question we 're gonna wanna go through next week when Hynek shows up I guess is given that we 've been if you look at what we 've been trying , we 're  looking at  , by then I guess , combinations of features and multi - band  , and we 've been looking at cross - language , cross task issues . And I guess when he comes here we 're gonna have to start deciding about  what do we choose from what we 've looked at to  blend with some group of things in what they 've looked at And once we choose that , how do we split up the effort ?  , because we still have even once we choose , we 've still got  another month or so ,  there 's holidays in the way , but but  I think the evaluation data comes January thirty - first so there 's still a fair amount of time to do things together it 's just that they probably should be somewhat more coherent between the two sites in that that amount of time . phd a: When they removed the silence frames , did they insert some kind of a marker so that the recognizer knows it 's knows when it 's time to back trace or something ? professor b: Well , see they , I I think they 're  . They 're they 're getting around the way the recognizer works because they 're not allowed to  , change the scripts for the recognizer , I believe . professor b:  that 's sort of what the way I had imagined would happen is that on the other side , yeah you p put some low level noise or something . professor b: Most recognizers don't like zeros but but you know , put some epsilon in or some rand phd a: Yeah .  i w Or something professor b: Maybe not a constant but it doesn't ,  don't like to divide by the variance of that , but  it 's phd a: That 's right . or else ,   maybe there is some indicator to tell it to start and stop , I don't know . Otherwise , if it 's just a bunch of speech , stuck together professor b: No they 're phd a: Yeah . And   I think  , I wanna look at these numbers off - line a little bit and think about it and and talk with everybody  , outside of this meeting .  , but  No  it sounds like  there there there are the usual number of of little little problems and bugs and so forth but it sounds like they 're getting ironed out . And now we 're seem to be kind of in a position to actually  , look at stuff and and and compare things .  I don't know what the One of the things I wonder about , coming back to the first results you talked about , is is how much ,  things could be helped by more parameters . Because anyway when we go to twice as much data and have the same number of parameters , particularly when it 's twice as much data and it 's quite diverse , I wonder if having twice as many parameters would help . How are we doing on the resources ? Disk , and phd d: I think we 're alright , professor b: OK . professor b: Are were you folks using Gin ? That 's a that just died , you know ? phd d: Mmm , no . professor b: That 'll be It 's a seven hundred fifty megahertz  SUN phd d:  . grad g: Do we Do we have that big new IBM machine the , I think in th professor b: We have the little tiny IBM machine that might someday grow up to be a big IBM machine . It 's got s slots for eight ,  IBM was donating five , I think we only got two so far , processors . So instead of having eight processors that were eight hundred megahertz , we ended up with two that are five hundred and fifty megahertz . So I don't think anybody has been sufficiently excited by it to spend much time  with it , but  Hopefully , they 'll get us some more parts , soon and  , yeah , I think that 'll be once we get it populated , that 'll be a nice machine . grad g: And if we can do things on Linux , some of the machines we have going already , like Swede ? professor b:   And it does have two processors , you know and Somebody could do you know , check out  the multi - threading libraries . And  i it 's possible that the  , I guess the prudent thing to do would be for somebody to do the work on on getting our code running on that machine with two processors even though there aren't five or eight . There 's there 's there 's gonna be debugging hassles and then we 'd be set for when we did have five or eight , to have it really be useful . You don't get the don't get the visuals but grad g: I is it  mostly  the neural network trainings that are  slowing us down or the HTK runs that are slowing us down ? professor b: I think yes .  , Isn't that right ?  I think you 're you 're sort of held up by both , right ? If the if the neural net trainings were a hundred times faster you still wouldn't be anything running through these a hundred times faster because you 'd be stuck by the HTK trainings , phd d: Mmm . professor b: But if the HTK  I think they 're both It sounded like they were roughly equal ? Is that about right ? phd d: Yeah . grad g: Because ,  I think that 'll be running Linux , and Sw - Swede and Fudge are already running Linux so ,  I could try to get  the train the neural network trainings or the HTK stuff running under Linux , and to start with I 'm wondering which one I should pick first . professor b: probably the neural net cuz it 's probably it it 's it 's  Well , I I don't know . They both HTK we use for  this Aurora stuff   , I think It 's not clear yet what we 're gonna use for trainings  Well , there 's the trainings  is it the training that takes the time , or the decoding ?  , is it about equal between the two ? For for Aurora ? phd d: For HTK ? professor b: For Yeah . Well , I don't know how we can I don't know how to Do we have HTK source ? Is that Yeah . professor b: You would think that would fairly trivially the training would , anyway , th the testing  I don't I don't think would parallelize all that well . But I think that you could certainly do d  , distributed , sort of Ah , no , it 's the each individual sentence is pretty tricky to parallelize . phd a: They have a they have a thing for doing that and th they have for awhile , in H T And you can parallelize the training . professor b: Yeah ? phd a: And run it on several machines professor b: Aha ! phd a: and it just basically keeps counts . phd a: I don't what their scripts are set up to do for the Aurora stuff , but phd d: Yeah . professor b: Something that we haven't really settled on yet is other than this Aurora stuff ,  what do we do , large vocabulary training slash testing for  tandem systems . So I I think the the advantage of going with the neural net thing is that we 're gonna use the neural net trainings , no matter what , for a lot of the things we 're doing , grad g: OK . professor b: whereas , w exactly which  Gaussian - mixture - based  thing we use is gonna depend  So with that , maybe we should  go to our digit recitation task . I think we can @ @ You know Herve 's coming tomorrow , right ? Herve will be giving a talk , yeah , talk at eleven . Did  , did everybody sign these consent Er everybody Has everyone signed a consent form before , on previous meetings ? You don't have to do it again each time Yes
grad a: And you should be able to see which one which one you 're on by , watching the little bars change . grad a: So , actually , if you guys wanna go ahead and read digits now , as long as you 've signed the consent form , that 's alright . grad e: Are we supposed to read digits at the same time ? grad a: No . We 're talking about doing all at the same time but I think cognitively that would be really difficult . grad a: So , when you 're reading the digit strings , the first thing to do is just say which transcript you 're on . You can see the transcript ? There 's two large number strings on the digits ? So you would just read that one . And the pause is just so the person transcribing it can tell where one line ends and the other begins . And I 'll give I 'll read the digit strings first , so can see how that goes . Well , why don't I go ahead and read digit strings and then we can go on from there . All of you look like you 're doing it reasonably correctly , but you want it about two thumb widths away from your mouth , and then , at the corner . And that 's so that you minimize breath sounds , so that when you 're breathing , you don't breathe into the mike . And the short form  , you should read the consent form , but  , the thing to notice is that we will give you an opportunity to edit a all the transcripts . So , if you say things and you don't want them to be released to the general public , which , these will be available at some point to anyone who wants them , you 'll be given an opportunity by email , to bleep out any portions you don't like .  , should I Do you want me to talk at all about why we 're doing this and what this project is ? professor c: yeah . Oh grad e: Does Nancy know that we 're meeting in here ? grad b: I sent an email . So are the people going to be identified by name ? grad a: Well , what we 're gonna we 'll anonymize it in the transcript . So , then in terms of people worrying about , excising things from the transcript , it 's unlikely . Oh , I see , but the a but the but the grad a: Right , so if I said , " Oh , hi Jerry , how are you ? " , we 're not gonna go through and cancel out the " Jerry "s . grad a: so we will go through and , in the speaker ID tags there 'll be , you know , M - one O seven , M - one O eight . grad a: it w  , I don't know a good way of doing it on the audio , and still have people who are doing discourse research be able to use the data . grad a: And so we don't wanna have to do aliases professor c: Right . grad a: So I think that it 's better just as a pro post - process to edit out every time you bash Microsoft . The idea is that you 'd be able to put a PDA at the table at an impromptu meeting , and record it , and then be able to do querying and retrieval later on , on the meeting . So that 's my particular interest , is a portable device to do m  , information retrieval on meetings . And so what we wanted is a room that 's instrumented with both the table top microphones , and these are very high quality pressure zone mikes , as well as the close talking mikes . What the close talk ng talking mikes gives us is some ground truth , gives us , high quality audio , especially for people who aren't interested in the acoustic parts of this corpus . So , for people who are more interested in language , we didn't want to penalize them by having only the far field mikes available . So that 's why we 're recording in parallel with the close talking and the far field at the same time . And then , all these channels are recorded simultaneously and framed synchronously so that you can also do things like , beam - forming on all the microphones and do research like that . Our intention is to release this data to the public , probably through f through a body like the LDC . So because the general environment is so challenging , we decided to to do at least one set of digit strings to give ourselves something easier . And it 's exactly the same digit strings as in TI - digits , which is a common connected digits corpus . grad a: OK , so when the l last person comes in , just have them wear a wireless . So , the most important form is the consent form , so just be s be sure everyone signs that , if they consent . grad b: I 'm sure it 's pretty usual for meetings that people come late , grad a: Yeah . And  , just give me a call , which , my number 's up there when your meeting is over . grad a: And I 'm going to leave the mike here but it 's n  , but I 'm not gonna be on so don't have them use this one . So you guys who got email about this oh f  , Friday or something about what we 're up to . grad e: What was the nature of the email ? professor c: Oh , this was about  , inferring intentions from features in context , and the words , like " s go to see " , or " visit " , or some grad b: Wel - we I  I I professor c: You didn't get it ? grad e: I don't think I did . We could pursue , if we thought it 's it 's worth it but , I think we we will agree on that , to come up with a with a sort of very , very first crude prototype , and do some implementation work , and do some some research , and some modeling . So the idea is if you want to go somewhere , and focus on that object down Oh , I can actually walk with this . Now , we found in our , data and from experiments , that there 's three things you can do . If you want to actually go up or into the tower , you have to go this way , and then through some buildings and up some stairs and so forth . If you actually want to see the tower , and that 's what actually most people want to do , is just have a good look of it , take a picture for the family , you have to go this way , and go up here . grad b: or so That 's ab er , i the street network of our geographic information system . It would always use the closest point to the object , and then the tourists would be faced , you know , in front of a wall , but it would do them absolutely no good . grad e: What 's it what 's it made out of ? grad b: r red limestone . Okay , I This ,  These intentions , we w w we could , if we want to , call it the the Vista mode , where we just want to eh s get the overview or look at it , the Enter mode , and the , well , Tango mode . So But sometimes the the Tango mode is really relevant in the in the sense that , if you want to ,  If you don't have the intention of entering your building , but you know that something is really close to it , and you just want to approach it , or get to that building . Consider , for example , the Post Office in Chicago , a building so large that it has its own zip code . So , I 've looked , through twenty some  , I didn't look through all the data .  , and there there 's  , a lot more different ways in people  , the ways people phrase how to g get if they want to get to a certain place . Maybe I should go back a couple of steps and go through the professor c: No , OK come in , sit down . grad b: Is I I think grad e: No , that one 's already on , I thought he said .  , people , when they w when they want to go to a building , sometimes they just want to look at it . I I gave an example where the point where you end up if you want to look at it is completely different from where if you want to enter it . So , this is sort of how people may ,  may phrase those requests to a a a mock - up system at least that 's the way they did it . And we get tons of of these " how do I get to " , " I want to go to " , but also , " give me directions to " , and " I would like to see " . And  , what we can sort of do , if we look closer a closer at the the data That was the wrong one . This is of course a crucial factor , " what type of object is it ? " So , some buildings you just don't want to take pictures of . Sometimes I found in the  , looking at the data , in a superficial way , I found some s sort of modifiers that that m may also give us a hint , " I 'm trying to get to " Nuh ? " I need to get to " . Sort of hints to the fact that you 're not really sightseeing and and just f there for pleasure and so forth and so on . That whatever it is you 're doing at the moment may also inter influence the interpretation of of a phrase . What we do know , is that the parser we use in the SmartKom system will never differentiate between any of these . So it 's it 's it 's way too crude to d capture those differences in intentions . So , I thought , " Mmm ! Maybe for a deep understanding task , that 's a nice sort of playground or first little thing . " Where we can start it and n sort of look " OK , we need , we gonna get those M - three - L structures . We may need additional part of speech , or maybe just some information on the verb , and modifiers , auxiliaries . And I will try to to sort of come up with a list of factors that we need to get out of there , and maybe we want to get a g switch for the context . So this is not something which we can actually monitor , now , but just is something we can set . And then you can all imagine sort of a a constrained satisfaction program , depending on on what , comes out . We want to have an a structure resulting if we feed it through a belief - net or or something along those lines . We 'd get an inferred intention , we we produce a structure that differentiates between the Vista , the Enter , and the , Tango mode . So we think it 's a well - formed , starter task for this , deeper understanding in the tourist domain . grad f: So , where exactly is the , deeper understanding being done ? Like  , s is it before the Bayes - net ? Is it ,  professor c: Well , it 's the it 's it 's always all of it . But it 's deep enough that you can distinguish between these th three quite different kinds of , going to see some tourist thing . And , so that 's that 's the quote " deep " that we 're trying to get at . And , Robert 's point is that the current front - end doesn't give you any way to Not only doesn't it do it , but it also doesn't give you enough information to do it . It isn't like , if you just took what the front - end gives you , and used some clever inference algorithm on it , you would be able to figure out which of these is going on . So , and this is Bu - I in general it 's gonna be true of any kind of deep understanding , there 's gonna be contextual things , there 're gonna be linguistic things , there 're gonna be discourse things , and they gotta be combined . And , my idea on how to combine them is with a belief - net , although it may turn out that t some totally different thing is gonna work better .  , the idea would be that you , take your You 're editing your slide ? grad b: Yeah . So the thing is , i  , d naively speaking , you 've you 've got a for this little task , a belief - net , which is going to have as output , the conditional pr probability of one of three things , that the person wants to  , to View it , to Enter it , or to Tango with it . And , then the question is there are two questions is , one , where do you get this i information from , and two , what 's the structure of the belief - net ? So what are the conditional probabilities of this , that , and the other , given these things ? And you probably need intermediate nodes . So it may well be that , for example , that , knowing whether Oh , another thing you want is some information abou I think , about the time of day . And , if things are obviously closed , then , you grad b: People won't want to enter it . And , if it 's not obvious , you may want to actually  , point out to people that it 's closed you know , what they 're g going to is closed and they don't have the option of entering it . grad b: s b professor c: So another thing that can come up , and will come up as soon as you get serious about this is , that another option of course is to have a more of a dialogue . So one thing you could do is build a little system that , said , " whenever you got a question like that I 've got one of three answers . grad b: But maybe that 's a false state of the system , that it 's too close to call . You want the you want the ability to a You want the ability to ask , but what you don't wanna do is onl build a system that always asks every time , and i That 's not getting at the scientific problem , grad b:   professor c: and it 's In general you 're you know , it 's gonna be much more complex than that .  , I think also the the the deep understanding part of it is is going to be in there to the extent that we  , want it in terms of our modeling . We can start , you know , basic from human beings , model that , its motions , going , walking , seeing , we can mem model all of that and then compose whatever inferences o we make out of these really conceptual primitives . S so so the way that might come up , if you wanna Suppose you wanted to do that , you might say , "  , as an intermediate step in your belief - net , is there a Source - Path - Goal schema involved ? " OK ? And if so , is there a focus on the goal ? Or is there a focus on the path ? or something . And that could be , one of the conditiona you know , th the In some piece of the belief - net , that could be the the appropriate thing to enter . grad f: So , where would we extract that information from ? From the M - three - L ? professor c: No . See , the M - three - L is not gonna give th What he was saying is , the M - three - L does not have any of that . grad e: The M - three - L is the old SmartKom output ? professor c: Right . professor c: So we have th w we we we have to have a better w way of referring to grad b: The parser output ? professor c:   grad b: " Analyzed speech " I think it 's what they call it , professor c: Yeah . grad b: o th No , actually , intention lattices is what we 're gonna get . professor c: Is - i but they c they call it intention lattice , but tha grad b: In - in a intention lattice k Hypothesis . So , th they 're gonna give us some cr  or We can assume that y you get this crude information . And they don't give you the kind of object , they don't give you any discourse history , if you want to keep that you have to keep it somewhere else . grad e: So , if someone says , " I wanna touch the side of the Powder - Tower " , that would basically , we need to pop up Tango mode and the and the directions ? professor c: If i if Yeah , if it got as simple as that , yeah . But that doesn't necessarily But we 'd have to infer a Source - Path - Goal to some degree for touching the side , right ? grad b: Well  , th the there is a p a point there if I understand you . " Where is the city hall ? " And this do they don't wanna sh see it on a map , or they don't wanna know it 's five hundred yards away from you , or that it 's to the your north . Where is that damn thing ? grad e: And the parser would output grad b: Well , that 's a a question mark . sh A lot of parsers , just ,  That 's way beyond their scope , is of interpreting that . You know ? But  , still outcome w the outcome will be some form of structure , with the town hall and maybe saying it 's a WH focus on the town hall . grad e: I 'm just trying to figure out what the SmartKom system would output , depending on these things . grad b: it will probably tell you how far away it is , at least that 's That 's even what Deep Map does . Because i we can not differentiate , at the moment , between , you know , the intention of wanting to go there or the intention of just know wanting to know where where it is . grad d: People no might not be able to infer that either , right ? Like the fact Like , I could imagine if someone came up to me and asked , " Where 's the city hall ? " , I might say , g ar " Are you trying to get there ? " Because how I describe  , t its location  , p probably depend on whether I think I should give them , you know , directions now , or say , you know , whatever , " It 's half a mile away " or something like that . grad b: because where people ask you , " Where is New York ? " , you will tell them it 's on the East Coast . grad b: Y y eh you won't tell them how to get there , ft you know , take that bus to the airport and blah - blah - blah . grad b: But if it 's the post office , you will tell them how to get there . professor c: But i Go go back to the the  , th grad b: So I w this is " onto " is is knowledge about buildings , professor c: Yeah , that slide . grad b: their opening times , and then t coupled with time of day , this should You know . grad d: So that context was like , their presumed purpose context , i like business or travel , as well as the utterance context , like , " I 'm now standing at this place at this time " . professor c: Yeah , well I think we ought to d a As we have all along , d We we 've been distu distinguishing between situational context , which is what you have as context , and discourse context , grad b:   And , so what we were talking about doing , a a as a first shot , is not doing any of the linguistics . So , the the the reason the belief - net is in blue , is the notion would be  , this may be a bad dis bad idea , but the idea is to take as a first goal , see if we could actually build a belief - net that would make this three way distinction  , in a plausible way , given these We have all these transcripts and we 're able to , by hand , extract the features to put in the belief - net . Saying , " Aha ! here 're the things which , if you get them out of out of the language and discourse , and put them into the belief - net , it would tell you which of these three  , intentions is most likely . " And if to actually do that , build it ,  you know , run it y y run it on the data where you hand - transcribe the parameters .  th th i i if you can't do this task ,  grad b: We need a different , engine . Well it i I if it if it 's the belief - nets , we we 'll switch to you know , logic or some terrible thing , but I don't think that 's gonna be the case . I think that , if we can get the information , a belief - net is a perfectly good way of doing the inferential combination of it . The real issue is , do what are the factors involved in determining this ? And I don't know . grad d: I missed the beginning , but ,  I guess could you back to the slide , the previous one ? So , is it that it 's ,  These are all factors that  , a These are the ones that you said that we are going to ignore now ? or that we want to take into account ? You were saying n professor c: Take them into account . And and it 's clear from the data , like , sorta the correct answer in each case . professor c: Let 's go back to th Let 's go back to the the the slide of data . grad d: That 's that 's the thing I 'm curious ab grad b:  grad d: Like do we know from the data wh which OK . But , since we are designing a a a an , compared to this , even bigger data collection effort , we will definitely take care to put it in there , grad d:   grad b: in some shape , way , form over the other , grad d:   grad b: to see whether we can , then , get sort of empirically validated data . grad b: from this , we can sometimes , you know an and that 's that but that isn't that what we need for a belief - net anyhow ? is sort of s sometimes when people want to just see it , they phrase it more like this ? But it doesn't exclude anybody from phrasing it totally differently , even if they still grad d:   grad b: But then other factors may come into play that change the outcome of their belief - net . And I 'm sure even i the most , sort of , deliberate data collection experiment will never give you data that say , " Well , if it 's phrased like that , the intention is this . grad b: You know , because then , you grad d: u u  , the only way you could get that is if you were to give th the x subjects a task . Right ? Where you have where your , current goal is to grad b: We Yeah ! That 's what we 're doing . grad d:  grad b: But but we will still get the phrasing all over the place . So , I think you all know this , but we are going to actually use this little room grad d:  professor c: and start recording subjects probably within a month or something . So , this is not any lo any of you guys ' worry , except that we may want to push that effort to get information we need . If it turns out that we need data of a certain sort , then the sort of data collection branch can be , asked to do that . And one of the reasons why we 're recording the meeting for these guys is cuz we want their help when we d we start doing  , recording of subjects . No , you you will not have , and there it is , and ,  But you know , y y the ,  grad d: And I think the other concern that has come up before , too , is if it 's  I don't know if this was collected what situation this data was collected in . Was it is it the one that you showed in your talk ? Like people grad b: No , no . So was this , like , someone actually mobile , like s using a device ? grad b: N no , no not i it was mobile but not not with a w a real wizard system . But , is it I guess I don't know The situation of of collecting th the data of , like Here you could imagine them being walking around the city . And then you have all sorts of other c situational context factors that would influence w how to interpret , like you said , the scope and things like that . grad d: If they 're doing it in a you know , " I 'm sitting here with a map and asking questions " , I I would imagine that the data would be really different . But It was never th th the goal of that data collection to to serve for sat for such a purpose . So that 's why for example the tasks were not differentiated by intentionality , grad d:    I 'm sure we can produce some if we need it , that that will help us along those lines . So , to Finding out what , you know , situational con what the contextual factors of the situation really are , you know is an interesting s interesting thing . grad b: u u Sort of I 'm , at the moment , curious and I 'm I 'm s w want to approach it from the end where we can s sort of start with this toy system that we can play around with , grad d:   grad b: so that we get a clearer notion of what input we need for that , grad d:   And then we can start worrying about where to get this input , what what do we need , you know Ultimately once we are all experts in changing that parser , for example , maybe , there 's just a couple three things we need to do and then we get more whatever , part of speech and more construction - type - like stuff out of it . grad e: How exactly does the data collection work ? Do they have a map , and then you give them a scenario of some sort ? grad b: OK . You 're gonna be in here , and somebody And and you see , either th the three - D model , or  , a QuickTime animation of standing u in a square in Heidelberg . So , just off a textbook , tourist guide , to familiarize , yourself with that sort of odd - sounding German street names , like Fischergasse and so forth . Part two is , you 're told that this huge new , wonderful computer system exists , that can y tell you everything you want to know , and it understands you completely . And so you 're gonna pick up that phone , dial a number , and you get a certain amount of tasks that you have to solve . First you have to know find out how to get to that place , maybe with the intention of buying stamps in there . Maybe So , the next task is to get to a certain place and take a picture for your grandchild . It crashes , And grad d: a At the third ? Right then ? grad b: After the third task . And then , a human operator comes on , and and exp apologizes that the system has crashed , but , you know , urges you to continue , you know ? now with a human operator . And so , you have basically the same tasks again , just with different objects , and you go through it again , and that was it . Oh , and one one little bit w And  , the computer you are you are being told the computer system knows exactly where you are , via GPS . And so you have to do some s tell the person sort of where you are , depending on what you see there .  , this is a a a a a bit that I d I don't think we Did we discuss that bit ?  , I just sort of squeezed that in now . grad d: So , in the display you can Oh , you said that you cou you might have a display that shows , like , the grad b: Yeah . grad d: And so , as you grad b: n grad d: Oh , two - D . grad d: So as you move through it that 's - they just track it on the for themselves grad b: Yeah . So grad b: Yeah ?  that would be an an an enormous technical effort , unless we would We can show it walks to , you know . grad b: And you see the label of the name So we get those names , pronunciation stuff , and so forth , and we can change that . So your tasks don't require you to  ,  yo you 're told So when your task is , I don't know , " Go buy stamps " or something like that ? So , do you have to respond ? or does your  , what are you ste what are you supposed to be telling the system ? Like , w what you 're doing now ? or grad b: Well , we 'll see what people do . grad d: There 's no OK , so it 's just like , " Let 's figure out what they would say under the circumstances " . grad b: in both cases it 's gonna be a human , in the computer , and in the operator case . grad b: And we will re there will be some dialogue , you know ? So , you first have to do this , and that , grad d: Yep . But  , maybe the maybe what you 're suggesting Is what you 're suggesting that it might be too poor , the data , if we sort of limit it to this ping pong one t  , task results in a question and then there 's an answer and that 's the end of the task ? You wanna m have it more more steps , sort of ? grad d: Yeah , I I don't know how much direction is given to the subject about what their interaction  , th they 're unfamiliar w with interacting with the system .  , we we have to have this discussion of th the experiment , and the data collection , and all that sorta stuff grad d:  - huh . Sh - Is sh grad d: She started taking the class last year and then didn't  , you know , didn't continue . So , anyway , she 's looking for some more part time work w while she 's waiting actually for graduate school . So we may have someone , to do this , and she 's got you know , some background in in all this stuff . That 's So , Nancy , we 'll have an At some point we 'll have another discussion on exactly wha t t you know , how that 's gonna go . professor c: And  , Jane , but also , Liz have offered to help us do this , data collection and design and stuff . professor c: So , when we get to that we 'll have some people doing it that know what they 're doing . I guess the reason I was asking about the sort of the de the details of this kind of thing is that , it 's one thing to collect data for , I don't know , speech recognition or various other tasks that have pretty c clear correct answers , but with intention  , obviously , as you point out , there 's a lot of di other factors and I 'm not really sure , how how e the question of how to make it a t appropriate toy version of that  , it 's ju it 's just hard . So , obviously it 's a grad e: Yeah , actually I guess that was my question . Is the intention implicit in the scenario that 's given ? Like , do the grad d: It is , if they have these tasks that they 're supposed to grad e: Yeah , I just wasn't sure to what level of detail the task was . professor c: the The problem that I was tr gonna try to focus on today was , let 's suppose by magic you could collect dialogues in which , one way or the other , you were able to , figure out both the intention , and set the context , and know what language was used . The issue is , can we find a way to , basically , featurize it so that we get some discrete number of features so that , when we know the values to all those features , or as many as possible , we can w come up with the best estimate of which of the , in this case three little intentions , are most likely . grad d: w What are the t three intentions ? Is it to go there , to see it , and grad b: To come as close as possible to it . professor c: Th - the terminology we 're using is to grad d: Yeah , it 's @ @ . " Take a picture of it " you you might well want to be a really rather different place than entering it . professor c: And , for an object that 's at all big , sort of getting to the nearest part of it  , could be quite different than either of those . professor c: Just sort of grad d: OK , so now I understand the referent of Tango mode . grad b: S To " Waltz " it ? grad d: Yeah , like , how close are you gonna be ? professor c: Well . So grad f: All these So , like , the question is how what features can like , do you wanna try to extract from , say , the parse or whatever ? professor c: Right . grad f: Like , the presence of a word or the presence of a certain  , stem , or certain construction or whatever . Is there a construction , or the kind of object , or w  , anything else that 's in the si It 's either in the in the s the discourse itself or in the context . So if it turns out that , whatever it is , you want to know whether the person 's  , a tourist or not , OK ? that becomes a feature . But fo for the current problem , it would just be , " OK , if you can be sure that it 's a tourist , versus a businessman , versus a native , " or something , that would give you a lot of discriminatory power and then just have a little section in your belief - net that said , " pppt ! " Though sin f in the short run , you 'd set them , grad f:   professor c: and see ho how it worked , and then in the longer run , you would figure out how you could derive them . So , how should What 's the  , plan ? Like , how should we go about figuring out these professor c: OK . So , first of all is , do e either of you guys , you got a favorite belief - net that you 've , you know , played with ? JavaBayes or something ? grad f: Oh . OK ? So y so one of th one of the things we wanna do is actually , pick a package , doesn't matter which one , presumably one that 's got good interactive abilities , cuz a lot of what we 're gonna be d You know , we don't need the one that 'll solve massive , belief - nets quickly . Because i that 's A lot of what it 's gonna be , is , playing with this . So that if if we have all these cases OK ? So we make up cases that have these features , OK , and then you 'd like to be able to say , " OK , here 's a bunch of cases " There 're even ones tha that you can do learning OK ? So you have all their cases and and their results and you have a algorithms to go through and run around trying to set the the probabilities for you .  , my guess is we aren't gonna have enough data that 's good enough to make the these data fitting ones worth it , but I don't know . OK , and you wanna it s You know , the standard things you want it stable , you want it yeah , @ @ . And , as soon as we have one , we can start trying to , make a first cut at what 's going on . OK ? We we have a we know what the outcomes are gonna be , and we have some some data that 's loose , we can use our own intuition , and see how hard it is , and , importantly , what intermediate nodes we think we need . So it if it turns out that just , thinking about the problem , you come up with things you really need to You know , this is the kind of thing that is , you know , an intermediate little piece in your belief - net . grad b: And it and it may serve as a platform for a person , maybe me , or whoever , who is interested in doing some linguistic analysis .  , w we have the For - FrameNet group here , and we can see what they have found out about those concepts already , that are contained in the data , you know , to come up with a nice little set of features and  , maybe even means of s  , extracting them . And and that altogether could also be  , become a nice paper that 's going to be published somewhere , if we sit down and write it . And  When you said JavaBayes belief - net you were talking about ones that run on coffee ? or that are in the program language Java ? professor c: No , th It turns out that there is a ,  The new end of Java libraries . I have no idea whether that 's  The obvious advantage of that is that you can then , relatively easily , get all the other Java packages for GUIs or whatever else you might want to do . professor c: So that i that 's I think why a lot of people doing research use that . But it may not be I have no idea whether that 's the best choice an and there 're plenty of people around , students in the department who , you know , live and breathe Bayes - nets . So , grad d: There 's the m tool kit that  , Kevin Murphy has developed , professor c: Right . I don't know I don't know whether you guys have met Kevin yet or not , grad b:   grad b: But i But since we all probably are pretty sure that , the professor c: Yeah . And the ontology that  ,  the student is is constructing for me back in in EML is in OIL and that 's also in XML . And so that 's where a lot of knowledge about bakeries , about hotels , about castles and stuff is gonna come from . grad b: so , if it has that IO capability and if it 's a Java package , it will definitely be able We can couple . grad b: Who isn't , nuh ? professor c: So , in terms of of interchanging in and out of any module we build , It 'll be XML . And if you 're going off to queries to the ontology , for example , you 'll have to deal with its interface . But that 's that 's fine an and  , all of these things have been built with much bigger projects than this in mind . It 's kind of blackboards and multi - wave blackboards and ways of interchanging and registering your a And so forth .  if we can get the core of the thing to work , in a way that we 're comfortable with , then we ca we can get in and out of it with , XML , little descriptors . Yeah , I like , for example , the what you said about the getting input from from just files about where you h where you have the data , have specified the features and so forth . professor c: I don't I don't see grad b: That 's , of course , easy also to do with , you know , XML . grad b: So r professor c: That that  , you know , feature value XML format is probably as good a way as any . So it 's als Yeah , I guess it 's also worth , while you 're poking around , poke around for XML packages that  , do things you 'd like . grad f: Doesn't does SmartKom system have such packages ? grad b: Yeah . It 's also professor c: And the question is , d you c you you 'll have to l We 'll have to l That should be ay We should be able to look at that grad b: No , u u y  the What I What sort of came to my mind i is was the notion of an idea that if if there are l nets that can actually lear try to set their own , probability factors based on on on on input professor c: Yeah . grad b: which is in file format , if we , get really w wild on this , we may actually want to use some some corpora that other people made and , for example , if if they are in in MATE , then we get X M L documents with discourse annotations , t you know , t from the discourse act down to the phonetic level . grad b: Michael has a project where you know , recognizing discourse acts and he does it all in MATE , and so they 're actually annotating data and data and data . So if we w if we think it 's worth it one of these days , not not with this first prototype but maybe with a second , and we have the possibility of of taking input that 's generated elsewhere and learn from that , that 'd be nice . professor c: It 'd be nice , but but I I I do I don't wanna count on it .  , you can't you can't run your project based on the speculation that that the data will come , grad b: No , no , just for professor c: and you don't have to actually design the nets . So in terms of of the ,  the what the SmartKom gives us for M - three - L packages , it could be that they 're fine , or it could be eeh . professor c: it 's ,  It doesn't control what you do in you know , internally . grad b:  grad e: What 's the time frame for this ? grad b: Two days ? Two , three days ? professor c: Huh ? Yeah bu w I 'd like that this y yeah , this week , to ha to n to have y guys , you know , pick the y you know , belief - net package grad b: No . professor c: and tell us what it is , and give us a pointer so we can play with it or something . professor c: And , then as soon as we have it , I think we should start trying to populate it for this problem . Make a first cut at , you know , what 's going on , and probably the ea easiest way to do that is some on - line way .  , you can f figure out whether you wanna make it a web site or You know , how grad b:  I I I  , OK , I t Yeah . grad b: But  , maybe it might be interesting if if the two of you can agree on who 's gonna be the speaker next Monday , to tell us something about the net you picked , and what it does , and how it does that . grad b: So that will be sort of the assignment for next week , is to to for slides and whatever net you picked and what it can do and and how far you 've gotten . Pppt ! professor c: Well , I 'd like to also , though , ha have a first cut at what the belief - net looks like . OK ? So , you know , here a here are grad e: So we 're supposed to @ @ about features and whatnot , professor c: Right . professor c: And , as I said , what I 'd like to do is , what would be really great is you bring it in If if if we could , in the meeting , say , you know , " Here 's the package , here 's the current one we have , "  , you know , " What other ideas do you have ? " and then we can think about this idea of making up the data file . Of , you know , get a t a p tentative format for it , let 's say XML , that says , l you know , " These are the various scenarios we 've experienced . " We can just add to that and there 'll be this this file of them and when you think you 've got a better belief - net , You just run it against this ,  this data file . grad e: And what 's the relation to this with Changing the table so that the system works in English ? grad b: OK . I 've downloaded them both , and I started to unpack the Linux one  , the NT one worked fine . and I started unta pack the Linux one , it told me that I can't really unpack it because it contains a future date . Now ,  Then it will be my job to get this whole thing running both on Swede and on this machine . And then  Hopefully that hoping that my urgent message will now come through to Ralph and Tilman that it will send some more documentation along , we I control p Maybe that 's what I will do next Monday is show the state and show the system and show that .  , what one hopes is that when we understand how the analyzer works , we can both worry about converting it to English and worry about how it could ex extract the parameters we need for the belief - net . So we 're gonna do belief - nets this week , and then professor c: Oh , yeah . n None of this is i n Neither of these projects has got a real tight time - line , in the sense that over the next month there 's a there 's a deliverable . If if you know , if we don't get any information for these guys f for several weeks then we aren't gonna sit around , you know , wasting time , trying to do the problem or guess what they You know , just pppt ! go on and do other things . grad b: Yeah , but  but the  This point is really I think very , very valid that ultimately we hope that that both will merge into a harmonious and , wonderful , state where we can not only do the bare necessities , IE , changing the table so it does exactly in English what it does in German , but also that we can sort of have the system where we can say , " OK , this is what it usually does , and now we add this little thing to it " , you know ? whatever , Johno 's and Bhaskara 's great belief - net , and we plug it in , and then for these certain tasks , and we know that navigational tasks are gonna be a core domain of the new system , it all all of a sudden it does much better . Nuh ? Because it can produce better answers , tell the person , as I s showed you on this map , n you know , produce either you know , a red line that goes to the Vista point or a red line that goes to the Tango point or red line that goes to the door , which would be great . So not only can you show that you know something sensible but ultimately , if you produce a system like this , it takes the person where it wants to go .  So this was actually an actual problem that we encountered , which nobody have has because car navigation systems don't really care . grad b: If you go d If you wanna drive to the SAP in Waldorf , I 'm sure the same is true of Microsoft , it takes you to the the address , whatever , street number blah - blah - blah , you are miles away from the entrance . professor c: Probably not then , cuz y you probably can't drop the mail there anyway . So , you two , who 'll be working on this , li are are you gl will you be doing Well ,  are you supposed to just do it by thinking about the situation ? Can you use the sample data ? professor c: Of course they use the sample data . grad d: Is it like Yeah , ho is there more than Is there a lot s of sample data that is beyond what you what you have there ? grad b: There there 's more than I showed , but  , I think this is sort of  , in part my job to look at that and and to see whether there are features in there that can be extracted , grad d: Yeah . grad b: and to come up with some features that are not you know , empirically based on on a real experiment or on on on reality grad d: Right . grad b: but sort of on your intuition of you know , " Aha ! This is maybe a sign for that , grad d:   We can end the meeting and call Adam , and then we wanna s look at some filthy pictures of Heidelberg . professor c: is that OK ? grad b: And that 's why , when it was hit by  , a cannon ball , it exploded . I first thought it had something to do with the material that it w that 's why I asked
professor b: OK So  today we 're looking at a number of  things we 're trying and  fortunately for listeners to this  we lost some of it 's visual but  got tables in front of us .  what is what does combo mean ? phd c: So combo is  a system where we have these features that go through a network and then this same string of features but low - pass filtered with the low - pass filter used in the MSG features . And so these low - pass filtered goes through M eh another MLP and then the linear output of these two MLP 's are combined just by adding the values and then there is this KLT . There is  there is the features  there 's the OGI features and then  those features  go through a contextual  l l let 's take this bottom arr one pointed to by the bottom arrow . phd c:  professor b: So phd c: So we have these features from OGI that goes through the three paths . phd c: The second path is  MLP also using nine frames several frames of features professor b: Yeah . phd c: MLP professor b: Aha ! aha ! phd c: Adding the outputs just like in the second propose the the proposal from for the first evaluation . So this is yeah professor b: And so  and then the the the one at the top and I presume these things that  are in yellow are in yellow because overall they 're the best ? phd c: Yeah that 's the reason , yeah . professor b: Oh let 's focus on them then so what 's the block diagram for the one above it ? phd c: For the f the f first yellow line you mean ? professor b: Yeah . phd c: Yeah so it 's  basically s the same except that we don't have this  low - pass filtering so we have only two streams . phd c:  professor b: Do you e  they mentioned made some  when I was on the phone with Sunil they they mentioned some weighting scheme that was used to evaluate all of these numbers .  actually the way things seems to  well it 's  forty percent for TI - digit , sixty for all the SpeechDat - Cars , well all these languages . professor b:  and we don't have the TI - digits part yet ? phd c: no . And so have you put all these numbers together into a single number representing that ? phd c: Yeah . professor b: OK so that should be pretty easy to do and that would be good phd c: No . professor b:  and how does this compare to the numbers oh so OGI two is just the top top row ? phd d: Yeah . phd c: So yeah to actually OGI two is the the baseline with the OGI features but this is not exactly the result that they have because they 've they 're still made some changes in the features professor b: OK .  I don't know by how much because they did not send us the new results professor b: OK . phd c:  professor b:  OK so the one one place where it looks like we 're messing things up a bit is in the highly mismatched Italian . phd c: But there are thirty - six and then sometimes we are we are we are around forty - two and professor b: Now up phd c: but professor b:  so one of the ideas that you had mentioned last time was having a a second  silence detection . professor b: So filt is what that is ? phd c: Filt , yeah phd d: Yeah . phd c:  yeah so it seems f for the the well match and mismatched condition it 's  it brings something .  but  actually apparently there are there 's no room left for any silence detector at the server side because of the delay . phd c:  t two days ago they were still working on this trying to reduce the delay of the silence detector so but yeah if we had time perhaps we could try to find  some kind of compromise between the delay that 's on the handset and on the server side . Perhaps try to reduce the delay on the handset and but well  For the moment they have this large delay on the the feature computation and so we don't professor b: OK . So Alright so for now at least that 's not there you have some results with low - pass filter cepstrum doesn't have a huge effect but it but it looks like it you know maybe could help in a couple places . professor b:  and   Yeah and  let 's see What else did we have in there ?  I guess it makes a l  at this point this is I I guess I should probably look at these others a little bit  And you you yellowed these out  but   Oh I see yeah that that one you can't use because of the delay .  let 's see that one Well even the just the the second row doesn't look that bad right ? That 's just  yeah ? phd c: Yep . professor b:  phd c: Actually the yeah the second line is  pretty much like the first line in yellow except that we don't have this KLT on the first on the left part of the diagram . Yeah so when we do this weighted measure we should compare the two cuz it might even come out better . professor b: So so there 's so I I would put that one also as a as a maybe .  and it yeah and it 's actually does does significantly better on the   highly mismatched Italian , so s and little worse on the mis on the  case , but  Well yeah it 's worse than a few things phd c:   professor b: so  let 's see how that c that c c see how that comes out on their their measure and are are we running this  for TI - digits or  phd c: Yeah . professor b: Now is TI di is is that part of the result that they get for the  development th the results that they 're supposed to get at the end of end of the month , the TI - digits are there also ? phd c: Yeah .  Oh I see the one I was looking down here at the the o the row below the lower yellowed one . professor b: What happens there is it 's around the same and so you could reduce the dimension as you were saying before a bit perhaps . professor b: It 's significantly worse it 's it 's  it 's it 's mostly worse . phd c: Exc - except for the HM phd d: For many a mismatch it 's worse . What are what are the sizes of any of these sets , I I 'm I 'm sure you told me before , but I 've forgotten . So you know how many words are in  one of these test sets ? phd c:  phd d: I don't remember . professor b: About ? phd c:  it 's it depends well the well matched is generally larger than the other sets and I think it 's around two thousand or three thousand words perhaps , at least . professor b: So the so the sets so the test sets are between five hundred and two thousand sentences , let 's say phd c: Mmm . professor b: and each sentence on the average has four or five digits or is it most of them longer or phd c: Yeah . phd d: Yeah for the Italian even seven digits y more or less phd c: It it d Seven digits . phd d: but sometime the sentence have only one digit and sometime  like  the number of  credit cards , something like that . See the  the reason I 'm asking is is is we have all these small differences and I don't know how seriously to take them , right ? phd c:  -  ? professor b: So  i if if you had  just you know to give an example , if you had   if you had a thousand words then  a a tenth of a percent would just be one word , phd c: Yeah . professor b:  so  yeah it be kind of I 'd kind of like to know what the sizes of these test sets were actually . phd d: The size that we have ? phd c: We could we could run run some kind of significance tests professor b: Yeah since these well also just to know the numbers , phd c: or phd d: Yeah . phd d: Yeah we have the result that the output of the HTK professor b: Yeah . professor b: Yeah so anyway if you could just mail out what those numbers are and then then that that be great . professor b:  what else is there here ?  see the second second from the bottom it says SIL , but this is some different kind of silence or thing or what was that ? phd c:  phd d: It the the output silence of the MLP . To apply also to in include also the the silence of the MLP we have the fifty - six form and the silence to pick up the silence and we include those . phd d: Yeah , because when we apply the KLT phd c: No they 're I think there is this silence in addition to the  KLT outputs professor b: No . phd c: it is because we we we just keep  we don't keep all the dimensions after the KLT phd d: In addition t phd c: and yeah . phd c: So we try to add the silence also in addition to the these twenty - eight dimensions . And what and what 's OGI forty - five ? The bottom one there ? phd c:  it 's o it 's OGI two , it 's so the th it 's the features from the first line phd d: It 's in fact OGI two . professor b: Right , but  what 's the what does the last row mean ? phd c: So it 's  basically this but without the KLT on the from the left path . So what 's the difference between the second phd c:  the second line you don't have this combo stuff so you just professor b: Oh . phd d:  professor b: OK , so alright so it looks to me I guess the same given that we have to take the filt ones out of the the running because of this delay problem so it looks to me like the ones you said I agree are are the ones to look at phd c:   professor b: oh yeah also when when they 're using this weighting scheme of forty , thirty - five , twenty - five is that on the percentages or on the raw errors ? I guess it 's probably on the percentages right ? phd c:  I guess , yeah .  OK so if we can know what how many words are in each and then  Dave  Dave promised to get us something tomorrow which will be there as far as they 've gotten Friday phd c:   professor b: and  how long did it I guess if we 're not doing all these things if we 're only doing   I guess since this is development data it 's legitimate to do more than one , right ?  ordinarily if in final test data you don't want to do several and and take the best phd c: Yeah . professor b: that 's that 's that 's not proper but if this is development data we could still look at a couple . But we have to decide  we have to fix the system on this d on this data , to choose the best professor b: Yeah . phd c: and these professor b: But the question is when when do we fix the system , phd c: But we could professor b: do we fix the system  tomorrow or do we fix the system on Tuesday ? phd c: it d professor b: I Yeah , OK except that we do have to write it up . professor b: Right so maybe what we do is we we we  as soon as we get the data from them we start the training and so forth phd c: Yeah but   professor b: but we start the write - up right away because as you say there there 's only minor differences between these . professor b: Yeah , and and I I would you know , I would I 'd kind of like to see it phd c:  yeah . Have y have you seen alt d do they have a format for how they want the system descriptions or anything ? phd c:  not really . Yes , for those who are listening to this and not looking at it  it 's not really that impressive , it 's just tiny . It 's all these little categories set a , set b , set c , multi - condition , clean . Do you know what no what no mitigation means here ? phd c:  it should be the the problem with the error channel error professor b: Oh that 's probably the phd c: or professor b: this is probably channel error stuff phd c: well , you professor b: huh ? Oh this is i right , it says right above here channel channel error resilience , phd c: Yeah .  and they have yes , split between seen databases and non - seen so basically between development and and evaluation . professor b: And so right , it 's presumed there 's all sorts of tuning that 's gone on on the see what they call seen databases and there won't be tuning for the  unseen . So the everything else is the SpeechDat - Car , that 's the multi multilingual phd c: Yeah , so it 's not divided between languages you mean or professor b: Well , it is . phd c: it just professor b: It is , but there 's also there 's these tables over here for the for the TI - digits and these tables over here for the car data which is which is I guess all the multilingual stuff phd c: Oh yeah . professor b: Well anyway , sounds like there 'll be a lot to do just to work with our partners to fill out the tables over the next  next few days phd c:   professor b: I guess they have to send it out let 's see the thirty - first is   Wednesday and I think the it has to be there by some hour  European time on Wednesday phd c:   professor b: so I think basically phd d: We lost time  Wednesday maybe because that the difference in the time may be is a long different of the time . professor b: E excuse me ? phd d: Maybe the Thursday the twelfth of the night of the Thurs - thirty - one is is not valid in Europe . professor b: Yes , so  I think we have to actually get it done Tuesday phd d: Tuesday . professor b:   phd c: Except if if it 's the thirty - one at midnight or I don't know we can still do some work on Wednesday morning . W i is but is is it midni I thought it was actually something like five PM on phd c: Yeah , well . professor b: was like I thought it was five PM or something , I didn't think it was midnight . professor b: well , so five PM their time is is if phd d: Not five PM , three PM . phd d:  no three three A - three PM ? phd c: No , we are wondering about the the the hour that we have to eh I don't know if it 's three PM it 's phd d: Oh yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah . phd c: Yeah , it 's it 's midnight but professor b: Yes , yes , but I didn't think it was midnight that it was due , I thought it was due at some hour during the day like five PM or something . professor b: so I I  well we should look but my assumption is that we basically have to be done Tuesday . professor b: but then then we 'll actually have the new data which is the German and the Danish phd c: Yeah . professor b: but that really will be much less work because  the system will be fixed phd c: Yeah . professor b: so all we 'll do is take whatever they have and and  and run it through the process . professor b: so there 'll be no new training , there 'll just be new HTK runs , so that 's means in some sense we can kind of relax from this after after Tuesday and and  maybe next meeting we can start talking a little bit about where we want to go from here  in terms of  the research . professor b:  you know what things  did you think of when you were  doing this process that  you just didn't really have time to adequately work on   so phd c:   professor b: What ? grad a: Oh , Stephane always has these great ideas and oh , but  we don't have time . professor b: And and  also it 's still true that  I think it 's true that that we we at least got fairly consistent i improved results by running  the  neural net transformation in parallel with the features phd c: But professor b: rather than  in sequence which was was your suggestion and that that that seems to have been borne out . professor b: The fact that none of these are are you know , enormous is is is not too surprising most improvements aren't enormous and  phd c: Yeah . professor b: some of them are but   you have something really really wrong and you fix it you can get big and really enormous improvements phd c:   professor b: but   Cuz our best improvements over the years that we 've gotten from finding bugs , but Anyway OK well I I think I see where we are and everybody knows what they 're doing and is there is there anything else we should talk about or or are we done ? phd c:   We so basically we will I think we 'll try to to focus on these three architectures and and perhaps I was thinking also a fourth one with just just a single KLT because we did not really test that professor b:  - huh . professor b: Oh I have yeah I do have one other piece of information which  I should tell people outside of this group too  I don't know if we 're gonna need it  but  Jeff up at the  University of Washington has  gotten a hold of a   some kind of server farm of  of ten   multiprocessor  IBM machines RS six thousands phd c:   professor b: and and  so I think each one is four processors or something or I don't know , eight hundred megahertz or something and there 's four processors in a box and there 's ten boxes and there 's some kind of ti so if you know he 's got a lot of processing power and  we 'd have to schedule it but if we have some big jobs and we wanna wanna wanna run them he 's he 's offering it . It 's  when he was here eh  he he used i not only every machine here but every machine on campus as far as I could tell , so so in some ways he just got his payback , but  again I I don't know if we 'll end up with if we 're gonna be CPU limited on anything that we 're doing in this group phd c:   OK well  you guys doing great stuff so that 's that that 's really neat and  we 'll   g don't think we need to   Oh well the other thing I guess that I will say is that  the digits that we 're gonna record momentarily is starting to get are starting to get into a pretty good size collection and  in addition to the SpeechDat stuff we will have those to work with really pretty soon now so that 's that 's another source of data .  which is s under somewhat better control and that we can we can make measurements of the room the  that you know if we feel there 's other measurements we don't have that we 'd like to have we can make them and  Dave and I were just talking about that a little while ago so  that 's another another possibility for this this kind of work . professor b: K ,  if nobody has anything else maybe we should go around do do our digits do our digits duty
grad c: Now can you give me the  remote T ? professor d: OK , so Eva , co  could you read your numbers ? grad a: Go ahead and read . grad b: Robert , do you  have any way to turn off your  screensaver on there so that it 's not going off every  , it seems to have about at two minute grad c: Yeah , I 've I  it 's not that I didn't try . grad c: and  I I told it to stay on forever and ever , but if it 's not plugged in it just doesn't obey my commands . grad c: But  we 'll just be m m working on it at intensity so it doesn't happen . grad c: So what I 've tried to do here is list all the decision nodes that we have identified on this side . So all of these tasks The reading is out of these tasks more or less imply that the user wants to go there , sometime or the other . And these are the data tasks where w we can assume the person would like to enter , view or just approach the thing . Analogously the same on the object information we can see that , you know , we have sort of created these tasks before we came up with our decision nodes so there 's a lot of things where we have no analogous tasks , and that may or may not be a problem . We can change the tasks slightly if we feel that we should have data for e sort of for every decision node so trying to im  implant the intention of going to a place now , going to a place later on the same tour , or trying to plant the intention of going sometime on the next tour , or the next day or whenever .  one of them is to work on the semantics of the belief - net which is going to be the main inference engine for thi the system  making decisions . so f the natural language understanding thing is  , we think gonna only have to choose parameters , but You know , a fairly large set of parameters . One of which is figure out what all the choices are , which we 've done a fair amount . Then we need to figure out what influences its choices and finally we have to do some technical work on the actual belief relations and presumably estimates of the probabilities and stuff . And we 're also , sort of  in the same process , going to work with Fey on what there should be in the dialogues . So One of the s steps that 's coming up real soon is to actually get subjects  in here , and have them actually record like this . And depending on what Fey sort of provokes them to say , we 'll get information on different things . grad c: Well how people phrase different intentions more or less , professor d: So Fo - v yeah people with the phrase them grad c: huh ? professor d: and so  for , you know , Keith and people worrying about what constructions people use ,  we have some i we have some ways to affect that by the way the dialogues go . So what Robert kindly did , is to lay out a table of the kinds of  things that that might come up , and , the kinds of decisions . So if if we 're right , you can get by with  just this middle column worth of decisions , and it 's not all that many , and it 's perfectly feasible technically to build belief - nets that will do that . grad c:  you can look at this if you want , these are what our subject 's going to have to fill out . grad c: Let me summarize in two sentences , mainly for Eva 's benefit , who probably has not heard about the data collection , at all . grad c: Or have you heard about it ? grad a: Not that much you didn't . grad c: Then then they will read  a task where lots of German words are sort of thrown in between . And  and they have to read isolated proper names And these change professor d: S I don't see a release grad c: No , this is not the release form . grad c: And  And then they gonna have to f   choose from one of these tasks , which are listed here . Six different things they sort of think they would do if they were in Heidelberg or traveling someplace and  and they have a map . grad c: And  grad b: This is a fictional system obviously , grad c: The comp Yeah , the computer system sits right in front of you , grad b: huh . So she can copy sentences into a window , or type really fast and this machine will use speech synthesis to produce that . So if you ask " How do I get to the castle " then a m s several seconds later it 'll come out of here " In order to get to the castle you do " grad b: Yeah . " And we sort of get the idea what people do when they s think they speak to a machine and what people say when they think they speak to a human , or know , or assume they speak to a human . grad c: And we 're gonna start tomorrow at three ? four ? one ? undergrad e: Tomorrow , well we don't know for sure . undergrad e: but grad c: And  we 're still l looking for a room on the sixth floor because they stole away that conference room . But professor d: Well , there are these   oh , I see , we have to Yeah , it 's tricky . And  I can report a so I did this but I also tried to do this so if I click on here , Isn't this wonderful ? we get to the   belief - net just focusing on on the g Go - there node . grad c: And what w what happened is that  design - wise I 'd sort of n noticed that we can we still get a lot of errors from a lot of points to one of these sub Go - there User Go - there Situation nodes . So I came up with a couple of additional nodes here where  whether the user is thrifty or not , and what his budget is currently like , is going to result in some financial state of the user . Being the same at this just the money available , which may influence us , whether he wants to go there if it is you know charging tons of dollars for admission or its gonna g cost a lot of t e whatever . grad c: So , and this actually turned out to be pretty key , because having specified sort of these  this this intermediate level  and sort of noticing that everything that happens here let 's go to our favorite endpoint one is again more or less we have  then the situation nodes contributing to the the endpoint situation node , which contributes to the endpoint and so forth .  I can now sort of draw straight lines from these to here , meaning it g of course goes where the sub - S everything that comes from situation , everything that comes from user goes with the sub - U , and whatever we specify for the so - called " Keith node " , or the discourse , what comes from the  parser , construction parser ,  will contribute to the D and the ontology to the sub - O node . And  one just s sort of has to watch which also final decision node so it doesn't make sense t to figure out whether he wants to enter , view or approach an object if he never wants to go there in the first place . And  now all w that 's left to do then is the CPG 's , the conditional probabilities , for the likelihood of a person having enough money , actually wanting to go a place if it costs , you know this or that . and once  Bhaskara has finished his classwork that 's where we 're gonna end up doing . And  And for now  the the question is " How much of these decisions do we want to build in explicitly into our data collection ? " So  , one could sort of think of you know we could call the z see or you know , people who visit the zoo we could s call it " Visit the zoo tomorrow " , so we have an intention of seeing something , but not now but later . Yeah , so let 's s  s see I th I think that from one point of view , all these places are the same , so that d d That ,  in terms of the linguistics and stuff , there may be a few different kinds of places , so I th i it seems to me that We ought to decide you know , what things are k are actually going to matter to us .  are all big - ish things that  you know have different parts to them , and one of them might be fine . Yeah The the reason why we did it that way , as a as a reminder , is  no person is gonna do all of them . professor d: And grad c: They 're just gonna select u  , according to their preferences . grad c: " Ah , yeah , I usually visit zoos , or I usually visit castles , or I usually " And then you pick that one . professor d: Right , no no , but but s th point is to to y to build a system that 's got everything in it that might happen you do one thing . professor d: T to build a system that  had the most data on a relatively confined set of things , you do something else . So , all I 'm saying is i th there 's there 's a kind of question of what we 're trying t to accomplish . and I think my temptation for the data gathering would be to  , you know And each person is only gonna do it once , so you don't have to worry about them being bored , so if if it 's one service , one luxury item , you know , one big - ish place , and so forth and so on ,  then my guess is that that the data is going to be easier to handle . Now of course you have this I guess possible danger that somehow there 're certain constructions that people use  when talking about a museum that they wouldn't talk about with a university and stuff ,  but I guess I 'm I  m my temptation is to go for simpler . But I don't know what other people think about this in terms of grad b: So I don't exactly understand professor d:  grad b: like I I I guess we 're trying to limit the detail of our ontology or types of places that someone could go , right ? But who is it that has to care about this , or what component of the system ? professor d: Oh , well ,  th I think there are two places where it comes up . One is  in the th these people who are gonna take this and and try to do speech with it . professor d:  Lots of pronunciations of th of the same thing are going to give you better data than l you know , a few pronunciations of lots more things . grad b: So we would rather just ask  have a bunch of people talk about the zoo ,  and assume that that will that the constructions that they use there will give us everything we need to know about these sort of zoo , castle , whatever type things , these bigger places . professor d: Bigger Y yeah thi well this is a question for grad b: And that way you get the speech data of people saying " zoo " over and over again or whatever too . professor d: and , you know , if we if we do , and we probably will , actually try to  build a prototype ,  probably we could get by with the prototype only handling a few of them anyway . So ,  grad c: Yeah , the this was sort of these are all different sort of activities . So , " Go to place " and then give them a choice , you know either they 're the symphony type or opera type or the tourist site guide type or the nightclub disco type person and they say " yeah this is on that " go to big - ish place " , grad b:   " And then we have the " Fix " thing , and then maybe " Do something the other day " thing , so . My question is I guess , to some extent , we should y we just have to try it out and see if it works . It would be challenging , in in a sense , to try to make it so so complex that they even really should schedule , or to plan it , a more complex thing in terms of OK , you know , they should get the feeling that there are these s six things they have to do and they sh can be done maybe in two days . grad c: So they make these decisions , professor d: Well I think th th grad c: " Can I go there tomorrow ? " professor d: yeah . So , the  system could say , " Well ,  we 'd like to to set up your program for two days in Heidelberg , you know , let 's first think about all the things you might like to do . So there th i i in  in I th I I 'm sure that if that 's what you did then they would start telling you about that , and then you could get into  various things about ordering , if you wanted . And that can be done , sort of to say , " OK now we 've picked these six tasks . grad c: And th w professor d: No , we have to help we have to decide .  , one is a planner The other , it kind of give you instructions on the spot grad c: Yeah , but th the I don't I 'm not really interested in sort of " Phase planning " capabilities . But it 's more the how do people phrase these planning requests ? So are we gonna masquerade the system as this as you said simple response system , " I have one question I get one response " , or should we allow for a certain level of complexity . professor d: Well , so Keith , what do you think ? grad b: Well ,  it seems that Yeah , off the top of my head it kinda seems like you would probably just want , you know , richer data , more complex stuff going on , people trying to do more complex sets of things .  you know , if our goal is to really sort of be able to handle a whole bunch of different stuff , then throwing harder situations at people will get them to do more linguistic more interesting linguistic stuff . But  I 'm I 'm not really sure  , because I don't fully understand like what our choices are of ways to do this here yet . grad c:  w we have tested this and a y have you heard listen to the f first two or th as a matter of fact the second person is  is was faced with exactly this kind of setup . grad b: I started to listen to one and it was just like , sort of depressing . grad c: And grad b: I thought I 'd just sort of listen to the beginning part and the person was just sort of reading off her script or something . grad b: So  , I grad c: it is already with this it got pretty with this setup and that particular subject it got pretty complex . grad c: Maybe I suggest we make some fine tuning of these , get sort of run through ten or so subjects grad b:   grad c: and then take a breather , and see whether we wanna make it more complex or not , depending on what what sort of results we 're getting . It In fact , I am just you know today , next couple days gonna start really diving into this data . I 've basically looked at one of the files you know one of these l y y y you gave me those dozens of files and I looked at one of them which was about ten sentences , found fifteen , twenty different construction types that we would have to look for and so on and like , " alright , well , let 's start here . So I haven't really gone into the , you know looked at all of the stuff that 's going on . So I don't really Right , once I start doing that I 'll have more to say about this kind of thing . grad c: And y and always professor d: But well th but you did say something important , which is that  you can probably keep yourself fairly well occupied  with the simple cases for quite a while . professor d: Although , obviously th so so that sa s does suggest that  , now , I have looked at all the data , and it 's pre it 's actually at least to an amateur , quite redundant . professor d: That that it was it was very stylized , and quite a lot of people said more or less the same thing . grad b: I  I did sort of scan it at first and noticed that , and then looked in detail at one of them . So grad c:  w do we wanna get going beyond more , which is sort of the professor d: Well , OK , so let 's let 's take let 's I I think your suggestion is good , which is we 'll do a b  a batch . And , Fey , How long is it gonna be till you have ten subjects ? Couple days ? Or thr f a A week ? Or I don't I don't have a feel for th undergrad e:  I can Yeah ,  I s I think can probably schedule ten people , whenever . professor d: Well , it 's it 's up to you ,  I j I  e We don't have any huge time pressure . It 's just when you have t undergrad e: How long will it be ? professor d: Yeah . grad c: This means audio , but professor d: and Huh ? grad c: no transcriptions of course , yeah . professor d: No , we won't have the transcriptions , but what we should be able to do and I don't know if , Fey , if you will have time to do this , but it would be great if you could , not transcribe it all , but pick out  , some stuff . professor d: Oh , we could get  , you can buy another disk for two hundred dollars , right ?  it 's it 's not like OK . grad c: No , he  , he he has been solving all our problems or is wonderful , professor d: OK . But anyway , so , If you if you can think of a way to  , point us to th to interesting things , sort of as you 're doing this or or something  , make your make notes or something that that this is , you know , something worth looking at . And other than that , yeah I guess we 'll just have to  , listen although I guess it 's only ten minutes each , right ? Roughly . professor d: People I understand , but people people you know  undergrad e: It feels like a long time grad c: Yeah .  But anyway yeah , so I think it 's a good idea to start with the sort of relatively straight forward res just response system . And then if we want to  get them to start doing  multiple step planning with a whole bunch of things and then organize them an  tell them which things are near each other and you know , any of that stuff .  You know , " Which things would you like to do Tuesday morning ? " grad c: Yeah . undergrad e: But were you saying that grad c: I need those back by the way . grad c: That 's for professor d: I 'm sorry , Fey , what ? undergrad e: That w maybe one thing we should do is go through this list and sort of select things that are categories and then o offer only one member of that category ? professor d: That 's what I was suggesting for the first round , yeah . undergrad e: And then , they could be alternate versions of the same If you wanted data on different constructions . professor d: They could , but i but i  tha eh they c yeah , but  but undergrad e: Like one person gets the version with the zoo as a choice , and the other person gets the professor d: You could , but i but I I I think in the short run , grad c: And no , th the per the person don't get it .  , this is why we did it , because when we gave them just three tasks for w part - A and three tasks for part - B a professor d: Right . But  I I think this approach will very well work , but the person was able to look at it and say " OK , This is what I would actually do . grad c: OK , we gotta we gotta disallow  traveling to zoos and  castles at the same time , sort of undergrad e:  there they are significantly different , but . grad c: But no , they 're  they 're sort of this is where tour becomes you know tourists maybe a bit different undergrad e: Yeah , I guess so . grad c: But we can  professor d: Yeah , in fact if y if y if you use the right verb for each in common , like at you know , " attend a theater , symphony or opera " is is a group , and " tour the university , castle or zoo " , grad c:  -  Yeah . professor d: all of these d do have this kind of " tour "  aspect about the way you would go to them . professor d: So it may turn out to be not so many different kinds of things , grad c:   professor d: and then , what one would expect is that that the sentence types would  their responses would tend to be grouped according to the kind of activity , you would expect . phd f: But  i it seem that  there is a difference between going to see something , and things like " exchange money " or " dine out " professor d: Oh , absolutely . grad c: Yeah , this is where yeah th the function stuff is definitely different and the getting information or g stuff yeah . So since people gonna still pick something , we we 're not gonna get any significant amount of redundancy . And  we would be ultimately more interested in getting all the possible ways of people asking , oh , for different things with or with a computer . And so if you can think of any other sort of high level tasks a tourist may do just always just m mail them to us and we 'll sneak them into the collection . But it seems like since we since we are getting towards  subject  fifty subjects and if we can keep it up  to a  sort of five four - ish per week rate , we may even reach the one hundred before Fey t takes off to Chicago . professor d: Well , these are all f people off campus s from campus so far , undergrad e: Yeah . professor d: So we yeah we don't know how many we can get next door at the  shelter for example . So , alright , so let 's go let 's go back then , to the the chart with all the decisions and stuff , and see how we 're doing . professor d: Do do people think that , you know this is is gonna  cover what we need , or should we be thinking about more ? grad c: Okay , in terms of decision nodes ?  , Go - there is is a yes or no . grad c: I 'm also interested in th in this " property "  line here , so if you look at sorry , look at that  , timing was  I have these three . Do we need a final differentiation there ? Now , later on the same tour , sometimes on the next tour . grad b: What 's this idea of " next tour " ?  grad c: It 's sort of next day , so you 're doing something now and you have planned to do these three four things , grad b:   grad c: you could sort of tag it on to that tour grad b: Or OK . grad c: or you can say this is something I would do s I wanna do sometime l in my life , basically . So so this tour is sort of just like th the idea of current s round of of touristness or whatever , professor d: Right . professor d:  if you if if you wanted precise about it ,  you know , grad b: Got it . professor d: You know , " OK , we 'll go back to the hotel and then we 'll go off grad b: OK . professor d: and " phd f: So all tours b a tour happens only within one day ? professor d: Yes . grad c: Well , my visit to Prague there were some nights where I never went back to the hotel , so whether that counts as a two - day tour or not we 'll have to think . grad b: You just spend the whole time at U Fleku or something , phd f: Yeah . What is the  the the English co   cognate if you want , for " Sankt Nimmerlandstag " ? grad b: Keine Ahnung grad c: Sort of " We 'll do it on when you say on that d day it means it 'll never happen . grad c: Do you have an expression ? Probably you sh grad b: Not that I know of actually . grad c: Yeah , when hell Yep , we 'll do it when hell freezes over .  , the reason why why do we go there in the first place IE  it 's either  for sightseeing , for meeting people , for running errands , or doing business . grad b: So , business is supposed to  , be sort of it like professional type stuff , right , or something like that ? grad c: Yep . " Who is the the tour is the person ? " So it might be a tourist , grad b:   grad c: it might be a business man who 's using the system , who wants to sort of go to some grad b: Yeah . He is going to  He 's there to teach a course at the business school but he also is touring around and so he may have some mixture of these things . grad c: He would phd f: What ab What do you have in mind in terms of  socializing ? What kind of activities ? grad c: Eh , just meeting people , basically . " I want to meet someone somewhere " , which be puts a very heavy constraint on the " EVA " phd f: Oh grad b: Yeah . grad c: you know , because then if you 're meeting somebody at the town hall , you 're not entering it usually , you 're just want to approach it . grad b: So  , does this capture , like , where do you put " Exchange money " is an errand , right ? But what about  grad c: Yep . professor d:  -  grad b: So , like " Go to a movie " is now entertainment , " Dine out " is phd f: Socializing , I guess . professor d: but but  I would say that if " Dine out " is a special c  if you 're doing it for that purpose then it 's entertainment . professor d: And we 'll also as y as you 'll s further along we 'll get into business about " Well , you 're you know this is going over a meal time , do you wanna stop for a meal or pick up food or something ? " grad b:   That 's that 's sort of part of th that 's not a destination reason , that 's sort of " en passant , " right .  , " mode " , I have found three , " drive there " , " walk there "  or " be driven " , which means bus , taxi , BART . professor d: Obviously taxis are very different than buses , but on the other hand the system doesn't have any public transport This the planner system doesn't have any public transport in it yet . grad c: So this granularity would suffice , I think w if we say the person probably , based on the utterance we on the situation we can conclude wants to drive there , walk there , or use some other form of transportation . grad b: H How much of Heidelberg can you get around by public transport ?  in terms of the interesting bits . There 's lots of bits where you don't really I 've only ev was there ten years ago , for a day , so I don't remember , but .  , like the sort of the tourist - y bits professor d:  - Well , grad c: Everywhere . grad b: is it like professor d: you can't get to the Philosophers ' Way very well , grad b: Yeah . professor d: but ,  there are hikes that you can't get to , but grad b: OK . grad a: So is like " biking there " part of like " driving there " , grad c: Yeah ,  we actually biking should be should be a separate point because we have a very strong bicycle planning component . grad c: Bicycles c should be in there , but , will we have bic  is this realistic ?  grad b: Yeah . grad c: We can we can sort of  , drive grad b: I would I would lump it with " walk " because hills matter . professor d: right ? grad c: OK , " Length " is  , you wanna get this over with as fast as possible , professor d: Alright . But we should just make a decision whether we feel that they want to use some substantial or some fraction of their time . grad c: You know , they wanna do it so badly that they are willing to spend  you know the necessary and plus time . And  And y you know , if we feel that they wanna do nothing but that thing then , you know , we should point out that to the planner , that they probably want to use all the time they have . It seems like it  you 're you 're talking about rather than having the user decide this you 're supposed t we 're supposed to figure it out ? professor d: w well grad c: Th - the user can always s say it , but it 's just sort of we we hand over these parameters if we make if we have a feeling that they are important . grad c: And that we can actually infer them to a significant de degree , or we ask . professor d: And par yeah , and part of the system design is that if it looks to be important and you can't figure it out , then you ask . professor d: But hopefully you don't ask you know , a all these things all the time . professor d: Or eh so , y but there 's th but definitely a back - off position to asking . grad c: And if no no part of the system ever comes up with the idea that this could be important , no planner is ever gonna ask for it . grad c: y so And I like the idea that , you know , sort of Jerry pushed this idea from the very beginning , that it 's part of the understanding business to sort of make a good question of what 's s sort of important in this general picture , what you need t grad b:   grad c: If you wanna simulate it , for example , what parameters would you need for the simulation ? And , Timing , Length would definitely be part of it , " Costs " , " Little money , some money , lots of money " ? professor d:   But a I as a tourist , I 'll just paying what 's what 's more or less is required . I think there are there 're different things where you have a ch choice , undergrad e: Mmm . professor d: for example ,  this t interacts with " do am I do oh are you willing to take a taxi ? " grad b: Dinner . professor d: Or  , you know , if if you 're going to the opera are you gonna l look for the best seats or the peanut gallery phd f: The best seat or or Right . So professor d: whatever ? S so I think there are a variety of things in which  Tour - tourists really do have different styles eating . grad c: The what what my sort of sentiment is they 're Well , I I once had to write a a a a charter , a carter for a a student organization . And I looked at the other ones and they always said ten percent of the student body has to be present at their general meeting otherwise it 's not a And I wrote in there " En - Enough " people have to be there . And it was hotly debated , but people agreed with me that everybody probably has a good feeling whether it was a farce , a joke , or whether there were enough people . grad c: And if you go to Turkey , you will find when people go shopping , they will say " How much cheese do you want ? " and they say " Ah , enough . Because the person selling the cheese knows , you know , that person has two kids and you know , a husband that dislikes cheese , so this is enough . grad c: And  so the middle part is always sort of the the golden way , right ? So you can s you can be really make it as cheap as possible , or you can say " I want , er , you know , I don't care " grad b: Money is no object . grad c: in much the same way as how how d you know should the route be ? Should it be the easiest route , even if it 's a b little bit longer ? grad b:   grad c: No steep inclinations ? Go the normal way ? Whatever that again means , er or do you does the person wanna rough it ? grad b:    th so there 's a couple of different ways you can interpret these things right ? You know " I want to go there and I don't care if it 's really hard . grad b: Right ? you know , so I assume we 're going for the first interpretation , undergrad e: Right . grad b: right ? Something like I 'll go th  I 'd li I dunno . It 's different from thing to professor d: No , I think he was going for the second one ar actually . grad b: Yeah ? I I professor d: Anyway , we 'll sort th yeah , we 'll sort that out .  " Object information " , " Do I do I wanna know anything about that object ? " is either true or false . if I care about it being open , accessible or not , I don't think there 's any middle ground there .  , either I wanna know where it is or not , I wanna know about it 's history or not , or ,  I wanna know about what it 's good for or not . professor d: Yeah , now ob OK , I 'm sorry , go ahead , what were you gonna say ? grad c: One could put scales in there . So " object " becomes " entity " , right ? grad c: Yep , that 's true . professor d: And we think that 's it , interestingly enough , that  , you know , th or or or something very close to it is going to be  going to be enough . professor d: Alright , so  So I think the order of things is that  , Robert will clean this up a little bit , although it looks pretty good . And grad c: What , well this is the part that professor d: Huh ? grad c: this is the part that needs the work . professor d: Yeah , so right , so So ,  In parallel ,  three things are going to happen .  Robert and Eva and Bhaskara are gonna actually build a belief - net that that , has CPT 's and , you know , tries to infer this from various kinds of information . And Fey is going to start collecting data , and we 're gonna start thinking a about  what constructions we want to elicit . And then w go it may iterate on  , further data collection to elicit grad b: D Do you mean Do you mean eliciting particular constructions ? Or do you mean like what kinds of things we want to get people talking about ? Semantically speaking , eh ? professor d: Well , yes . professor d: And And so  grad b:  from my point of view I 'm I 'm trying to care about the syntax , so you know professor d: Well that too , grad b: OK . professor d: but  You know if th if we in if we you know , make sure that we get them talking about temporal order . professor d: OK , that would be great and if th if they use prepositional phrases or subordinate clauses or whatever , grad b:   professor d: But I I think that probably we 're gonna try to look at it as you know , s what semantic constructions d do we do we want them to  do direc grad b: OK . professor d: you know , " Caused motion " , I don't know , something like that . professor d:  But , Eh -  this is actually a conversation you and I have to have about your thesis fantasies , and how all this fits into that . grad c: Because I have not been able to dig out all the stuff out of the m ta thirty D V grad b: OK . grad c:  If you grad b: Is that roughly the equivalent of of what I 've seen in English or is it grad c: No , not at all . Like what What have I got now ?  I have  what what I 'm loo what I Those files that you sent me are the user side of some interaction with Fey ? grad c: A little bit of data , I grad b: Is that what it is ? Or ? grad c: With nothing . grad c: And  the see this this this  ontology node is probably something that I will try to expand . Once we have the full ontology API , what can we expect to get from the ontology ? And hopefully you can sort of also try to find out , you know , sooner or later in the course of the summer what we can expect to get from the discourse that might , you know or the grad b:   grad c: in terms of  professor d: Right , but we 're not expecting Keith to actually build a parser .  He 's g he 's hoping to do this for his masters ' thesis s by a year from now . grad b:  sometime , I have to talk to some subset of the people in this group , at least about  what sort of constructions I 'm looking for .  , you know obviously like just again , looking at this one  thing , you know , I saw y things from sort of as general as argument structure constructions . I have to do   unbounded dependencies , you know , which have a variety of constructions in   instantiate that . On the other hand I have to have , you know , there 's particular  , fixed expressions , or semi - fixed expressions like " Get " plus path expression for , you know , " how d ho how do I get there ? " , professor d:   grad b: " How do I get in ? " , " How do I get away ? " professor d: Right . Like professor d: OK , so this is I think we 're gonna mainly work on with George . professor d: OK , and hi let me f th say what I think is is so the idea is  first of all I misspoke when I said we thought you should do the constructions . So what I yeah , OK , So what what I meant was " Do a first cut at " . professor d: OK , Because  we do wanna get them r u perfectly but I think we 're gonna have to do a first cut at a lot of them to see how they interact . And I I me it would it would be completely out of the question to really do more than , say , like , oh I don't know , ten , over the summer , professor d: Yeah . grad b: but  , but you know obviously we need to get sort of a general view of what things look like , so yeah . So the idea is going to be to do sort of like Nancy did in some of the er these papers where you do enough of them so you can go from top to bottom so you can do f you know , f f  have a complete story ov of s of some piece of dialogue . professor d: And that 's gonna be much more useful than having all of the clausal constructions and nothing else , or or or something like that . professor d: So that the the trick is going to be t to take this and pick a some sort of lattice of constructions , grad b:   professor d: so some lexical and some phrasal , and and , you know , grad b:   professor d: whatever you need in order to  , be able to then , by hand , you know , explain , some fraction of the utterances . professor d: And so , exactly which ones will partly depend on your research interests and a bunch of other things . But  in terms of the s th sort of level of  of analysis , you know , these don't necessarily have to be more complex than like the " Out of " construction in the BCP paper where it 's just like , you know , half a page on each one or something . professor d: And if if there 's something that really requires a lot more than that then it does and we have to do it , grad b: Yeah . grad c: We could sit down and think of sort of the the ideal speaker utterances , grad b:   grad c: and  two or three that follow each other , so , where we can also sort of , once we have everything up and running , show the tremendous , insane inferencing capabilities of our system . This is sort of their standard demo dialogue , which is , you know , what the system survives and nothing but that . grad c: we could also sor sort of have the analogen of o our sample sentences , the ideal sentences where we have complete construction coverage and , sort of , they match nicely . grad c: So the the " How do I get to X ? " , grad b: Yeah . grad c: And hey , that 's that 's already covering eighty percent of the system 's functionality . grad c: No , we can w throw in an " Out of Film " construction if you want to , but professor d: No , no , no . Well the th the thing is there 's a lot that needs to be done to get this right . professor d: OK , I th We done ? grad c: I have one bit of news . grad c: the action planner guy has wrote has written a a p lengthy proposal on how he wants to do the action planning . grad c: And I responded to him , also rather lengthy , how he should do the action planning . And I tacked on a little paragraph about the fact that the whole world calls that module a dis disc dialogue manager , professor d: Right . grad c: and wouldn't it make sense to do this here too ? professor d: Right . grad c: And also Rainer M Malaka is going to be visiting us shortly , most likely in the beginning of June . grad c: And  m making me incapable of going to NAACL , for which I had funding . grad c: When is the  Santa Barbara ? professor d: S grad c: Who is going to ?  should a lot of people . grad b: How much does it cost ? grad c: There 's grad b: I haven't planned to go . So , if we all decide it 's a good idea for you to go then you 'll we 'll pay for it . professor d:  I I don't have a feeling one way or the other at the moment , grad b: OK
But  we 're gonna try to make this an abbreviated meeting cuz the the next next occupants were pushing for it , so . Agenda is according to this , is transcription status , DARPA demos XML tools , disks , backups , et cetera and grad h: Does anyone have anything to add to the agenda ? professor b: OK . grad h:  phd d: I g grad h: as a somewhat segue into the next topic ,  could I get a hold of  the data even if it 's not really corrected yet just so I can get the data formats and make sure the information retrieval stuff is working ? postdoc a: Certainly . So I 'll I 'll probably just make some copies of those rather than use the ones that are there . grad h:  and then just we 'll have to remember to delete them once the corrections are made . professor b: OK , wh phd d: I also got anot a short remark to the transcription . I 've  just processed the first five EDU meetings and they are chunked up so they would they probably can be sent to IBM whenever they want them . phd d: but the other ones phd f: That 's the one that we 're waiting to hear from them on . postdoc a: These are separate from the ones that phd f: As soon as postdoc a: these are phd f: They 're the IBM set . And so as soon as we hear from Brian that this one is OK grad h: Is my mike on ? Yeah . phd f: and we get the transcript back and we find out that hopefully there are no problems matching up the transcript with what we gave them , then  we 'll be ready to go and we 'll just send them the next four as a big batch , postdoc a: Excellent . grad h: And so we 're doing those as disjoint from the ones we 're transcribing here ? phd f: Yes , exactly . phd f: We 're sort of doing things in parallel , that way we can get as much done a at once . grad h: Yeah , I think that 's the right way to do it , phd f: Yeah . grad h: Right , which  So I 've been working on using the THISL tools to do information retrieval on meeting data and the THISL tools are there 're two sets , there 's a back - end and a front - end , so the front - end is the user interface and the back - end is the indexing tool and the querying tool . So at least on the one meeting that I had the transcript for  conveniently you can now do information retrieval on it , do type in a a string and get back a list of start - end times for the meeting , phd f: What what kind of  what does that look like ? The string that you type in . phd f: What are you are you are they keywords , or are they ? grad h: Keywords . grad h: Right ? And so and then it munges it to pass it to the THISL IR which uses an SGML - like format for everything . professor b: And then does it play something back or that 's something you 're having to program ? grad h: right now , I have a tool that will do that on a command line using our standard tools , professor b: Yeah . grad h: but my intention is to do a prettier user interface based either So so that 's the other thing I wanted to discuss , is well what should we do for the user interface ? We have two tools that have already been written . grad h:  the other option is Dan did the Tcl - TK THISL GUI front - end for Broadcast News professor b: Yeah . postdoc a: I Can I ask a question ? So  as it stands within the the Channeltrans interface , it 's possible to do a find and a play . So e Are you So you 're adding like  , I don't know ,  are they fuzzy matches or are they  ? grad h: It 's a sort of standard , text - retrieval - based So it 's  term frequency , inverse document frequency scoring . grad h:  and then there are all sorts of metrics for spacing how far apart they have to be and things like that . So it it 's postdoc a: It 's a lot more sophisticated than the  the basically Windows - based grad h: i it 's like doing a Google query or anyth anything else like that . grad h: So i it uses So it pr produces an index ahead of time so you don't you 're not doing a linear search through all the documents . Cuz you can imagine if with if we have the sixty hours ' worth you do wouldn't wanna do a search . grad h:  you have to do preindexing and so that these tools do all that . And so the work to get the front - end to work would be porting it well  to get it to work on the UNIX systems , our side is just rewriting them and modifying them to work for meetings . grad h: So that it understands that they 're different speakers and that it 's one big audio file instead of a bunch of little ones and just sorta things like that . phd f: So what does the user see as the result of the query ? grad h: On which tool ? phd f: THISL . grad h: The THISL GUI tool which is the one that Dan wrote , Tcl - TK phd f: Yeah . grad h:  you type in a query and then you get back a list of hits and you can type on them and listen to them . professor b: Mmm phd f: So if you typed in " small heads " or something you could grad h: Right , you 'd get phd f: get back a   something that would let you click and listen to some audio where that phrase had occurred grad h: something You you 'd get to listen to " beep " . It 's too bad that that couldn't come into the grad h: You couldn't get a video . phd g: Guess who I practice on ? postdoc a: At some point we 're gonna have to say what that private joke is , that keeps coming up . Yeah , it loo it my my recollection of it is it 's it 's a pretty reasonable  demo sort of format . grad h: And so I think there 'd be minimal effort to get it to work , minimally phd f: That sounds really neat . grad h: and then we 'd wanna add things like query by speaker and by meeting and all that sort of stuff .  Dave Gelbart expressed some interest in working on that so I 'll work with him on it . And it it 's looking pretty good , you know , the fact that I got the query system working . grad h: If we wanna get it to Windows it 's gonna be a little more work because the THISL IR , the information retrieval tool 's  , I had difficulty just compiling them on Solaris . phd f: But you were saying that that the  that there 's that set of tools , Cygnus tools , that grad h: So . grad h: But what those they what those do is provide sort of a BSD compatibility layer , professor b:   phd f: And you have to have all the o grad h: But the problem is that that the THISL tools didn't use anything like Autoconf and so you have the normal porting problems of different header files and th some things are defined and some things aren't and  different compiler work - arounds and so on . So the fact that  it took me a day to get it c to compile under Solaris means it 's probably gonna take me s significantly more than that to get it to compile under Windows . professor b: How about having it run under free BSD ? phd e: Well what you need grad h: Free BSD would probably be easier . phd e: All you need to do is say to Dan " gee it would be nice if this worked under Autoconf " and it 'll be done in a day . phd d:  phd e: Right ? grad h: Actually you know I should check because he did port it to SPRACHcore phd e: Right . professor b: So grad h: I 'll check at that professor b: But it would what would serve would serve both purposes , is if you contact him and ask him if he 's already done it . phd e: What I phd f: How does it play ? grad h: Yeah , right . professor b: If he has then you learn , if he hasn't then he 'll do it . So , and I 've been corresponding with Dan and also with   , SoftSound guy ,  postdoc a: It 's amazing . professor b: Tony Robinson ? phd f: Tony Robinson ? grad h: Do  Tony ? I guess I do . grad h: Which one do  ? phd e: Steve Renals is not SoftSound , is he ? professor b: No . grad h: so that 's all going pretty well , professor b: Assuming we 're phd e: Right . phd f: What about issues of playing sound files @ @ between the two platforms ? grad h: I think we 'll be OK with that . phd e: Why don't you try and merge Transcriber and THISL IR ? They 're both Tcl interfaces . grad h: Well this is one of the reasons This is the one of the reasons that I 'm gonna have  Dave Gelbart Gelbart Having him volunteer to work on it is a really good thing because he 's worked on the Transcriber stuff phd e: Right . But the point is that the Transcriber uses Snack and then you can but you can use a a lot of the same functionality and it 's grad h: Yeah , yeah , I I think THISL THISL GUI probably uses Snack . Well my thought was is that it would be nice it would be nice to have the running transcripts  eh you know , from speaker to speaker . grad h: And if it doesn't phd e: Right ? Do you have you have , you know , a speaker mark here and a speaker mark here ? grad h: Right , we 'll have to figure out a user interface for that , so . It might be fairly difficult to get that to work in the little short segments we 'd be talking about and having the search tools and so on . grad h: but professor b: The thing I was asking about with , free BSD is that it might be easier to get PowerPoint shows running in free BSD than to get this other package running in grad h: Yeah ,  we have to I have to sit down and try it before I make too many judgments , professor b: Yeah . grad h: so   My experience with the Gnu compatibility library is really it 's just as hard and just as easy to port to any system . grad h: It 's just , you know , just like all of them , the " include " files are a little different and the function calls are a little different . grad h: So I it might be a little easier but it 's not gonna be a lot easier . So there was that demo , which was one of the main ones , then we talked about  some other stuff which would basically be  showing off the the Transcriber interface itself and as you say , maybe we could even merge those in some sense , but but  ,  and part of that was showing off what the speech - non  nonspeech stuff that Thilo has done s looks like . postdoc a: Can I ask one more thing about THISL ? So with the IR stuff then you end up with a somewhat prioritized  ? grad h:   phd g: So another idea I w t had just now actually for the demo was whether it might be of interest to sh to show some of the prosody  work that Don 's been doing . phd g:  actually show some of the features and then show for instance a task like finding sentence boundaries or finding turn boundaries . professor b: Well I think at at the very least we 're gonna want something illustrative with that phd g: I don't know if that would be of interest or not . professor b: cuz I 'm gonna want to talk about it and so i if there 's something that shows it graphically it 's much better than me just having a bullet point phd g: Yeah . professor b: pointing at something I don't know much about , phd g: you 're looking at this now professor b: so . phd g: Are you looking at Waves or Matlab ? grad c:  yeah I 'm starting to and  Yeah we can probably find some examples of different type of prosodic events going on . phd g: Yeah def professor b: S so when we here were having this demo meeting , what we 're sort of coming up with is that we wanna have all these pieces together , to first order , by the end of the month phd g: I professor b: and then that 'll give us a week or so . The end of phd g: Oh , the end of this month or next month ? Oh , you mean like today ? grad h: This month . professor b:  that 'll that 'll give us that 'll give us a week or so to  to port things over to my laptop and make sure that works , phd e: Exactly . phd g: Yeah if d if Don can sort of talk to whoever 's professor b: Yeah . phd g: cuz we 're doing this anyway as part of our you know , the research , visualizing what these features are doing professor b: Yeah . professor b: so  , you know , to let s the goal is to let them know what it is we 're doing . professor b: So that 's phd g: I don't think anyone has done this on meeting data so it might be neat , you know . So I 've been doing a bunch of XML tools where you we 're sort of moving to XML as the general format for everything and I think that 's definitely the right way to go because there are a lot of tools that let you do extraction and reformatting of XML tools . So yet again we should probably meet to talk about transcription formats in XML because I 'm not particularly happy with what we have now .  it works with Transcriber but it it 's a pain to use it in other tools  because it doesn't mark start and end .  , but I 've installed XML tools of various sorts in various languages and so if people are interested in doing extracting any information from any of these files , either  information on users because the user database is that way I 'm converting the Key files to XML so that you can extract m  various inf  sorted information on individual meetings grad c: Cool . And so l just let me know there it 's mostly Java and Perl but we can get other languages too if if that 's desirable . Is do we have the the seat information ? In in the Key files now ? postdoc a:   grad h: The seat information is on the Key files for the ones which postdoc a: Ah . phd g: Oh in For the new one grad h: it 's been recorded , phd g: OK . phd g: I 'm just trying to figure out , you know , when Morgan 's voice appears on someone 's microphone are they next to him or are they across from him ? professor b: Yeah . phd f: how how w eh where is it in the Key file ? grad h: Right . phd g: Cuz  I haven't been putting it in and in by grad h: You haven't been putting it in . postdoc a: Isn't it always on the digits ? professor b: Some of these are missing . phd g: And professor b: Aren't they ? postdoc a: Isn't it always on the digits forms ? professor b: Some fall out of phd g: Well it grad h: Yeah so we can go back and fill them in for the ones we have . phd g:  they 're on th right , these , but I just hadn't ever been putting it in the Key files . phd f: Yeah I I never phd g: And I don't think Chuck was either phd f: I never knew we were supposed to put it in the Key file . phd g: cuz grad h: I had told you guys about it phd f: Oh really ? phd g: Oh , so we 're both sorry . grad h: but phd g: So grad h:  this is why I wanna use a g a tool to do it rather than the plain text phd g: OK . grad h: I think it 's Edit - key , command Did I show you guys that ? phd d: Yep . phd f: You mentioned it , grad h: I did show it to you , phd f: yeah . grad h: but I think you both said " no , you 'll just use text file " . grad h: Yeah , and so if you don't fill it in , you 're not gonna get it in the meetings . grad c: u grad h: Yeah and then the other thing also that Thilo noticed is , on the microphone , on channel zero it says hand - held mike or Crown mike , phd g: Yeah . phd g: maybe I forgot to d phd f: Takes me no time at all to edit these . grad h: Yeah that 's cuz you kn phd f: I 'm not doing anything . phd g: And I was I was looking at Chuck 's , like , " oh what did Chuck do , OK I 'll do that " . grad h: And then  also in a couple of places instead of filling the participants under " participants " they were filled in under " description " . Oh  also I 'm working on another version of this tool , the the one that shows up here , that will flash yellow if the mike isn't connected . And it 's not quite ready to go yet because  it 's hard to tell whether the mike 's connected or not because the best quality ones , the Crown ones , are about the same level if they 're off and no one 's o off or if they 're on and no one 's talking . So I 'm working on that and it it sorta works and so eventually we will change to that and then you 'll be able to see graphically if your mike is dropping in or out . grad c: Will that also include like batteries dying ? Just a any time the mike 's putting out zeros basically . phd f: But with the screensaver kicking in , it phd d: But grad h: Now phd d: y yeah . grad h:  the other thing is as I 've said before , it is actually on the thing . postdoc a: It would be nice if if these had little light indicators , little L E Ds for grad h:  buzzer . grad h: " Bamp , bamp ! " professor b: Small shocks postdoc a: Yeah . Oh grad h: OK , disk backup , et cetera ?  I spoke with Dave Johnson about putting all the Meeting Recorder stuff on non - backed - up disk to save the overhead of backup and he pretty much said " yeah , you could do that if you want " but he thought it was a bad idea . In fact what he said is doing the manual one , doing  NW archive to copy it is a good idea and we should do that and have it backed up . grad h: And so if a mistake is made and we lose the backup we should have the archive and if then a mistake is made and we lose the archive we should have the backup . professor b: Well I guess it is true that even with something that 's backed up it 's not gonna if it 's stationary it 's not going to go through the increment it 's not gonna burden things in the incremental backups . But he said that that we sh shouldn't worry too much about that , that we 're getting a new backup system and we 're far enough away from saturation on full backups that it 's w probably OK . professor b: Really ? grad h: And  , so the only issue here is the timing between getting more disks and  recording meetings . professor b: So I guess the idea is that we would be reserving the non - backed - up space for things that took less than twenty - four hours to recreate or something like that , right ? grad h: Things that are recreatable easily and also Yeah , basically things that are recreatable . professor b: Well I was allowing someone else to come up with something related that they had  phd e: I thought you guys were gonna burn C Ds ? grad h:  unfortunately we could burn C Ds but first of all it 's a pain . grad h: Because you have to copy it down to the PC and then burn it and that 's a multi - step procedure . And second of all the the write - once burners as opposed to a professional press don't last . grad h: So I think burning them for distribution is fine but burning them for backup is not a good idea . Can I add one top topic ? We have time ? I wanted to ask , I know that  that Thilo you were , bringing the Channeltrans interface onto the Windows machine ? And I wanted to know is th phd d: Yeah it 's it Basically it 's done , postdoc a: It 's all done ? That 's g wonderful . grad h: Yes , since Tcl - TK runs on it , basically things 'll just work . phd d: Yeah it Yeah , it was just a problem with the Snack version and the Transcriber version but it 's solved . Does this mean that the that this could be por  ported to a Think - Pad note or some other type of  phd d: Yeah , basically  I did install it on my laptop and yeah postdoc a: Wonderful . CrossPads ? CrossPads ? grad h:  got an email from  James Landay who basically said " if you 're not using them , could you return them ? " So he said he doesn't need them , he just periodically w at the end of each term sends out email to everyone who was recorded as having them and asks them if they 're still using them . professor b: Once ? grad h: We we used them a couple times , postdoc a:   phd f: Them ? There 's more than one ? grad h: but postdoc a: Yeah . professor b: But grad h: My opinion on it is , first , I never take notes anyway so I 'm not gonna use it ,  and second , it 's another level of infrastructure that we have to deal with . postdoc a: And I have  so my my feeling on it is that I think in principle it 's a really nice idea , and you have the time tags which makes it better tha than just taking ra raw notes . On the other hand , I the down side for me was that I think the pen is really noisy . And I and I don't know if it 's audible on the but I I sort of thought that was a disadvantage . I do take notes , I could be taking notes on these things and I guess the plus with the CrossPads would be the time markings but I don't know . phd d: what is a CrossPad ? professor b: So it 's it 's  it 's a regular pad , just a regular pad of paper but there 's this pen which indicates position . grad h: And then you can download it and they have OCR and searching and all sorts of things . grad h: But I don't take notes , professor b: And one of the reasons that it was brought up originally was because  we were interested in in higher - level things , grad h: so . professor b: not just the , you know , microphone stuff but also summarization and so forth and the question is if you were going to go to some gold standard of what wa what was it that happened in the meeting you know , where would it come from ? And  I think that was one of the things , phd d: Yeah . We 'll have a you know , have a scribe , have somebody  take good notes and then that 's part of the record of the meeting . And then we did it once or twice and we sort of grad h: Yep , and then just sort of died out . professor b: probably chose the wrong scribe but it was It 's  phd g:  grad h: Yeah that 's right . postdoc a: u but I guess the the other thing I 'm thinking is if we wanted that kind of thing I wonder if we 'd lose that much by having someone be a scribe by listening to the tape , to the recording afterwards and taking notes in some other interface . phd f:  we 're transcribing it anyways , why do we need notes ? postdoc a: Oh it 's la it 's useful , grad h: Because that 's summary . phd g: I think there 's also there 's this use that phd f: Summarize it from the transcription . phd g: the Well , what if you 're sitting there and you just wanna make an X and you don't wanna take notes and you 're you just wanna phd f: Doodle . phd g: get the summary of the transcript from this time location like you know , and and then while you 're bored you don't do anything and once in a while , maybe there 's a joke and you put a X and But in in other words you can use that just to highlight times in a very simple way . Also with I was thinking and I know Morgan disagrees with me on this but suppose you have a group in here and you wanna let them note whenever they think there might be something later that they might not wanna distribute in terms of content , they could just sort of make an X near that point or a question mark that sort of alerts them that when they get the transcript back they c could get some red flags in that transcript region and they can then look at it . I know we haven't been using it but I w I can imagine it being useful just for sort of marking time periods grad h: Right . professor b: I guess so , you know , what what makes one think i is maybe we should actually schedule some periods where people go over something later phd g: so . professor b: and and and put some kind of summary or something  you know , some there 'd be some scribe who would actually listen , w who 'd agreed to actually listen to the whole thing , not transcribe it , but just sort of write down things that struck them as important . But then you don't you don't have the time reference  that you 'd have if you had it live . And you don't have a lot of other cues that might be useful , professor b: Yeah . phd f: How do you synchronize the time in the CrossPad and the time of the recording ? phd g: so . grad h:  that was one of the issues we talked about originally and that that 's w part of the difficulty is that we need an infrastructure for using the time the CrossPads and so that means synchronizing the time phd g:  postdoc a:   grad h: You know you want it pretty close and there 's a fair amount of skew because it 's a hand - held unit with a battery postdoc a: Well when when I d grad h: and so you postdoc a: OK . grad h: so you have to synchronize at the beginning of each meeting all the pads that are being used , so that it 's synchronized with the time on that and then you have to download to an application , and then you have to figure out what the data formats are and convert it over if you wanna do anything with this information . phd e: Why grad h: And so there 's a lot of infrastructure which postdoc a: There is an alternative . grad h: unless someone postdoc a: There is an alternative , it 's still , there 's  you know , your point stands about there be needing to be an infrastructure , but it doesn't have to be synchronized with the little clock 's timer on it . You c  , I when I when I did it I synchronized it by voice , by whispering " one , two , three , four " onto the microphone grad h:  . grad h: Well , but then there 's the infrastructure at the other end phd e: Right . grad h: which someone has to listen to that and find that point , postdoc a: Yeah , it 's transcribed . phd g: Well , could we keep one of these things for another year ? Would h  is there a big cau grad h: We can keep all both of them for the whole whole year . phd g: just just in case we grad h: it 's just phd g: even maybe some of the transcribers who might be wanting to annotate  f just there 's a bunch of things that might be neat to do but I it might not be the case that we can actually synchronize them and then do all the infrastructure but we could at least try it out . professor b: Well one thing that we might try  is on some set of meetings , some collection of meetings , maybe EDU is the right one or maybe something else , we we get somebody to buy into the idea of doing this as part of the task . professor b:  part of the reason I think part of the reason that Adam was so interested in  the SpeechCorder sort of f idea from the beginning is he said from the beginning he hated taking notes and grad h: Yep . professor b: and so forth so and and Jane is more into it but eh  you know I don't know if you wanna really do do this all the time so I think the thing is to to get someone to actually buy into it and have at least some series of meetings where we do it . The p the the problem with the the more extended view , all these other you know with  quibbling about particular applications of it is that it looks like it 's hard to get people to   routinely use it ,  it just hasn't happened anyway . But maybe if we can get a person to phd g: Yeah I don't think it has to be part of a what everybody does in a meeting but it might be a useful , neat part of the project that we can , you know , show off as a mechanism for synchronizing events in time that happen that you just wanna make a note of , like what Jane was talking about with some later browsing , just just as a convenience , even if it 's not a full - blown note taking substitute . phd e: Well if you wanted to do that maybe the right architecture for it is to get a PDA with a wireless card . And and that way you can synchronize very easily with the the the meeting because you 'll be synchroni you can synchronize with the the Linux server and  phd g: So what kind of input would you be ? phd e: so so , if you 're not worried about grad h: Buttons . phd g: You 'd just be pressing like a a phd e: Well well you have a PDA and may and you could have the same sort of X interface or whatever , you 'd have to do a little eh a little bit of coding to do it . phd e: if if all you really wanted was you didn't want this secondary note - taking channel but just sort of being able to use m markers of some sort , a PDA with a l a wireless card would be the probably the right way to go . grad h:  for what what you 've been describing buttons would be even more convenient than anything else , phd g: M right . grad h: right ? You have the phd g: I don't have , you know , grandiose ideas in mind but I 'm just sort of thinking well we 've we 're getting into the next year now and we have a lot of these things worked out at in terms of the speech maybe somebody will be interested in this and postdoc a: I like this PDA idea . professor b: where like one one button was "  - oh " and then another button was " that 's great " and another button " that 's f " phd g: Or like this is my " I 'm supposed to do this " kind of button , postdoc a: Yeah . phd g: Yeah something like that or postdoc a: And then grad h:  I think the CrossPad idea is a good one . grad h: It 's just a question of getting people to use it and getting the infrastructure set up in such a way that it 's not a lot of extra work .  that 's part of the reason why it hasn't happened is that it 's been a lot of extra work for me phd g: Yeah . grad h: and postdoc a: But it 's also , it has this problem of having to go from an analog to a d a digital record too , phd g: W postdoc a: doesn't it ?  grad h: Well it 's digital but it 's in a format that is not particularly standard . postdoc a: But  , say , if i if if you 're writing if you 're writing notes in it does it it can't do handwriting recognition , right ? professor b: No , no , but it 's just it 's just storing the pixel informa position information , postdoc a: OK . postdoc a: I I guess what I 'm thinking is that the PDA solution you h you have it already without needing to go from the pixelization to a to a  professor b: Right . You don't have to phd e: The transfer function is less errorful , postdoc a: Oh , nicely put . phd g: Well it also it 's maybe realistic cuz people are supposed to be bringing their P D As to the meeting eventually , right ? That 's why we have this little I don't know what I don't wanna cause more work for anyone but I can imagine some interesting things that you could do with it and so if we don't have to return it and we can keep it for a year I don't know . grad h: Well w we don't we certainly don't have to return it , as I said . All all he said is that if you 're not using it could you return it , if you are using it feel free to keep it . The point is that we haven't used it at all and are we going to ? professor b: So we have no but  by I I would suggest you return one . phd g: We c professor b: We have some aspirations of using them phd g: One would probably be fine . professor b: and phd g: Maybe we could do like a student project , you know , maybe someone who wants to do this as their main like s project for something would be cool .  if we had them out and sitting on the table people might use them a little more professor b: Maybe Jeremy could sit in some meetings and press a button when there when when somebody laughed . grad h: although there is a little phd g: Well , I 'm yeah , that 's not a bad professor b: Yeah , yeah . phd g: Jeremy 's gonna be an he 's a new student starting on modeling brea breath and laughter , actually , which sounds funny but I think it should be cool , professor b: Yeah . phd g: You 're you 're gonna tease me ? grad h: Oh , equipment . grad h: And then at the same time I 'll probably rewire the room as per Jane 's suggestion so that  the first N channels are wireless , eh are the m the close - talking and the next N are far - field . professor b: You know what he means but isn't that funny sounding ? " We ordered more wireless . " It 's like wires are the things so you 're wiring you 're you 're you we 're we ordered more absence of the thing . phd g: I just it 's sort of a anachronism ,  it 's like It 's great . professor b:  there 's there 's all this stuff going on  between  Andreas and and and Dave and Chuck and others with various kinds of runs   recognition runs , trying to figure things out about the features but it 's it 's all sort of in process , so there 's not much to say right now . grad h: So just the transcript number and then the then the phd e: This is Yes , this is number two for me today . professor b: See all you have to do is go away to move way up in the phd e: Oh . grad h: Should we do simultaneous ? phd g: Well , I 'm just thinking , are you gonna try to save the data before this next group comes in ? professor b: Yeah . phd g: You have to plug your ears , by the way  Eric , grad h: Well I have to , phd d: You don't have to
project manager: Are we done ? Right , okay  , this is our second meeting and I might be a bit all over the place . industrial designer: project manager: right our agenda for today , do you want us to give you a second ? marketing: no that's okay , project manager: Okay ,  marketing: sorry . project manager: we decided upon a universal control , one handset for all , T_V_ , video equipment . project manager: that it was important that the product was accessible to a wide range of consumers , wide age range , not limiting anyone . We decided it was important to reflect the company's image in our product , we put fashion in electronics , you know that kind of s thing .  , our budget would have to affect  try not to reflect our budget ,  that we might have a bit of oh oh you can see it , okay . industrial designer: project manager:  want it to look uncluttered , undaunting to the customer . We discussed a flip-open design ,  reducing the size of the control and an electronic panel  for further features like programming , things like that .  , three presentations , I've got written here so shall we hear from Marketing first ? marketing:  is it okay if I postpone that til later , I just want to get access to a little bit more information , project manager: No that's fine , that's fine . What do I have to press ? Oh , F_ eight ? project manager: F_N_ function F_ eight . project manager: industrial designer: 'Kay , this is where I went a bit mad with PowerPoint so . What the first thing question I asked was what are we trying to design ? Well , a device which basically just sends the signal to the T_V_ to change its state , whether that be the power , or the channel  or the volume , everything is just  some sort of signal to change the state of the T_V_ or other appliance that it's sending the signal to .  , so I decided I'd have a look at what th other people have designed and try and take some inspiration from that . But  although we will want to be taking ideas from other people , we wanna make sure that our design stands out and I thought that was something that well it wasn't really my area because I'm dealing with the inside really . So  , yeah I ran out of time so I couldn't do this one as fun as the last one . project manager: industrial designer:  and  I found out that most  controls use some form of infrared to send signals to the T_V_ presumably because of the cost issue of  something like  the same thing that computers use , wireless and , you don't need to send very much information . Now our one , I'm I'm not sure whether we want to look at the size issue because most of them are powered by triple A_ batteries but those can be quite bulky so I d I didn't know if you wanted to look at something else  so we could shrink down the size of the control . marketing: is that appropriate ? You're saying the triple A_ batteries are small or the surrounding it ? industrial designer:  no no , if you if you look at if you look at most remote controls they're quite they're quite chunky and that's because of the size of the batteries , marketing: marketing: Right , the triple A_s are the smallest you can get are they not , right ? industrial designer: Yeah the the user interface: Okay . industrial designer: well you can you can get the sort of circular round ones but I'm just wondering about power consumption marketing: Oh I see . industrial designer: and d which leads sort of onto the next point about 'em being small and easy to carry round .  , now the ones at the moment are small but I was just wondering if we could look at something a bit smaller . Now the main components I came up with  were obviously the power source for the batteries 'cause otherwise it's not gonna work ,  as I said about the w which batteries we were gonna choose , we can  discuss that later and then you obviously need something to decode the information that you're putting in from from the controller Now these have a wireless range of up to about five metres which is sort of suitable for anyone who's watching the T_V_ unless they're in a cinema , which not most people do so as we're applying to the most audience that should be fine . And then I was  just had a quick look at the external design but I d I left that mostly to the  interface designer . user interface: industrial designer: It's not a proper circuit , I'm not sure if it'd work or not , I'm not even confident that those are the real  the real way you'd wire it up but anyway , we've just got the the power going to the infrared bulb with the chip and the  U_I_ interface  which would basically , when you when you pressed anything it would the chip would convert it into some form of I_R_ data which could be decoded by the T_V_ receiver , which obviously means that we're gonna have to conform to whatever  whatever form of communication that the T_V_s are already using and since that that's another use and reason to use that infrared because that's what all T_V_s use at the moment . And then finally ,  we want  the it to be available to a wide audience at a low cost so all the components that I've put forward are  low in cost so that that should be good .  it should should be different enough  from the alternative products to get a good consumer base , we were talking about it before and also just something that I was thinking about ,  because they're small they're also easy to lose so if we could look into some way of d dunno some anti-going down the side of the sofa thing that you could have , marketing:  . marketing: That's a very important part , it came up in our market research findings too so I can refer to that , whenever you like me to present . industrial designer: Alright okay , and yeah , that's that's what I came up with there , project manager: Okay , thank you very much . industrial designer: so if you wanna project manager: would you like to continue on from that ? user interface: Yep . user interface: but basically my method was like  whatever brainstorming we did in the last meeting , just a couple of valuable points and started developing on that and there might be some missing loops in this thing which I think we'll  take a feedback from the marketing because  , I haven't had some marketing data and basically every product is marketable . So purpose , as William already said , I would put it to simplify the interaction with T_V_ to make make it as simple as possible . And to summarise I I would say it's it should be user-friendly by being easy to use , rather than having a lot of complex button because you can have an engineering maybe having hundred buttons and maybe having  a remote control which has the main features like volume control or channel ch changing the channel or whatever . But we are to to make it unique so that people want to buy it , will this two features together . The main functions such as which are like often used will be on the top and the complex functions which say you you can say like the y young generation or trendy generation want to pr say programme their favourite channels or whatever , can be put in the middle part of the f flip-top . So it's like it could be accessed by a wide ra range of  audience and we can punch in new f features such as  added features such as shock proof body and maybe a design to appeal to a lot of people . Findings most people prefer us user-friendly rather than complex remote controls because there are times like  people have used a remote control for say a year or something and they they are not used maybe thirty to forty percent of the buttons so it's not of no use of punching in the  trying to put in those things in on the top of the remote control and try to confuse the user . As we saw we we have to make a profit also so we we can maybe go for an economies of a higher production  by fifty million we said ? Yeah , industrial designer: Yeah . user interface: with that I think we'll be able to achieve economies of scale also , so we can give in add in more features and make it less costly .  , that's so this is if you ask me personally , I would make  flip-top with a trendy   design and s maybe we we should look at also like the buttons whe whether they are like soft or little hard because they are times when the buttons tend to be a bit hard after  continuous use usage and all that . project manager: okay so if anyone wants to write something down that they want to bring up at the end ,  industrial designer: Yeah sure . user interface: I think you'll have to marketing: Have I got to keep this here ? user interface: You can't marketing: Does it matter ? user interface: It'll have to this can't be pulled . marketing: I'll have t I'll have to move it won't I ? project manager: We just do the best we can . marketing: Okay , I'm going to look at the functional requirements from the marketing point of view and  obviously our starting point with marketing is always market research .  , so that's where we started , we used our our usability lab , the company's usability lab , we did our usual selection methods to get a cross-section of the general public , male and female , all age groups from fifteen upwards and  we observed them in the lab , just their general use of the remote control , you can see we had a hundred subjects there . The overall thing which I've I've got at the top there in italics is that users dislike the look and feel of current remote controls , so it has obvious design implications there . Eighty percent would spend more money when a remote control would look fancy , we were quite surprised by that finding , but  that's quite a high proportion of our our , you know , international target group are prepared to spend more money for something that's a bit nicer looking . For example , you can see below there , seventy five percent of users zap a lot , user interface: Yeah .  , fifty percent of users only use ten percent of the buttons , so again a big design issue there .  and possibly we can also cut back on cost if we don't have so many functions actually on the remote control .  the biggest frustrations that people found with regard to personal preferences were  something that you you mentioned earlier ,  remote controls are often lost in the room , it's a slipping down the back of the sofa type of thing ,  fifty percent were were particularly frustrated by that .  thirty four percent of people take said they take too much time to learn to use and I think that ties in with the  the previous finding of people only using ten percent of the buttons , they just can't be bothered to learn about the other functions .  the vast majority of the thirty five and under age group would like  a liquid crystal display and speech recognition , again that was to aid I think in  when they've lost the actual remote control , some kind of speech recognition . Something we didn't put to them , but which I'm thinking of now is  even if perhaps the lost control can give off a bleep every now and again til you find it or a flashing light , possibly . So thirty fives and unders who would like those two features , that kind of evens out thirty five to forty five and in the older age group it kind of reverses , they're not so bothered with this . marketing: but I think I'll just keep it simple , industrial designer: marketing: if there's any more information I can email you extra details , user interface: That's fine . project manager: we have new project requirements ,  we're not going to be using teletext , user interface: Okay .  our control is only going to be for T_V_ , it's not going to be a combined control , which limits you know all of the different things that it limits the cost for us , user interface: marketing: - , so can we not programme a video with this remote control ? project manager: It says for T_V_ only , so looks like it's just marketing: Just channel-hopping . project manager: yeah , I think maybe Sky things like that might be incorporated into it , but I don't know , what do you think ? It just said , for T_V_ only . I d well I dunno 'cause  the w if you've g project manager:  you bu well som you get com you get combined T_V_ and videos don't you ? industrial designer: Yeah . industrial designer: and if you got if you got a Sky box , they have one of those plus boxes , you can record straight off the T_V_ anyway so on to on to like the T_V_ hard drive or so . user interface: Anything about that on the market research or something like regarding whether people want a combined something like that ? marketing: Yes . marketing:  we didn't really look into that but remember we found that finding that most people only use about  ten percent of the buttons , user interface: Ten perc project manager:  . marketing: I think th th those do tend to be the basic channel-hopping things and on and off for the video , fast-forwarding , so on industrial designer: Yeah . marketing: and I think it's sort of general knowledge that people do find programming their videos a nightmare user interface: Okay . industrial designer: Ju  just as an idea on the  speech recognition thing that pr it'd probably be quite expensive to incorporate an entire speech recognition thing marketing: marketing: In fact I've just called up that table there , industrial designer: Alright , okay . marketing: we asked those two questions , the table relates to both questions , so we didn't differentiate . Would you prefer an L_C_D_ screen , that's multi-function remote and would you pay more for speech recognition in a remote control ? industrial designer: Alright , okay . marketing: So you can see how the the yes no sort of varies across the age group there , project manager: marketing: and a substantial number of don't knows in the older age group , I think that's just general fear of new technology . project manager: Yeah , industrial designer: Yeah but  on on that again I just thought 'cause you can get those key chains now and you whistle and then it'll let off a loud noise to let you know where it is user interface: project manager: We do have a budget limitation that we can't control ourselves , so I think when we can take a cheaper option which still does the same kinda thing marketing:  . project manager:  because it is something I it needs to be the thing that you use to find it needs to be something that you don't lose , you were saying whistling , industrial designer: Yeah . project manager: maybe on the T_V_ you could put like a pack on the T_V_ or something so you can't see the remote , you go and press the button on top of the T_V_ and it beeps user interface: Okay . project manager: and you're like oh okay it's over there , something like that , industrial designer: Yeah . project manager:  the third thing was that we have to make sure the corporate image is very much incorporated into the handset .  so we want logo , we want  fashionable , trendy ,  what you were talking about with the marketing . marketing: Yes , further market research will be needed to kind of focus on what that is , it's gonna be different for a fifteen year old th for somebody who's sixty project manager: Yeah . What is  attractive to a trendy New Yorker and what is attractive to a retired South African , I dunno , project manager:  . At the end of the day , th the engineering design is one thing , it's the user interface design that may and th the sort of you know fashionable aspect of it we might have to change for different markets round the world . user interface: So are we talking of a single model or maybe five , six designs ? project manager: Yeah . industrial designer: Well y yeah you could you could have a number of different designs user interface: Alright . user interface: So project manager: What about you were talking about the buttons , user interface: Yeah . project manager:  the controls that are coming out now have kind of big , rubber buttons , not tiny little one , big , rubber buttons , but what about , 'cause we got to make it original , what about  you know with the touch screen computers industrial designer: 'Kay . project manager: yeah ?  so you it's like a little panel that you touch rather than a button which shouldn't wear out as much either , not sure about the user interface: industrial designer: No , well no 'cause you wouldn't have to you don't actually have to press them you just project manager: You don't have to press it , you just have to put your thumb onto it . project manager: think that might appeal I'm thinking kind of Japan , I'm thinking  young ,  office people , marketing:  . marketing: Yes it will appeal to sections of the market def project manager: but quite , easily labelled so that anyone can oh yeah that's obvious what that's for marketing: project manager: and it's not daunting to maybe the older generations ,  marketing: - ,  . But also er ergonomics as we're saying with the different designs , ergonomics  there's sort of physically different things 'cause  if you've ever seen the X_ Box they had to make two different sized controllers because people in Japan wouldn't buy it because the controller was physically to big project manager: Were too big . industrial designer: so they couldn't get round the controller which is  so if you I don't know what 'cause you obviously you can have bigger buttons for some countries or something and smaller ones for others . user interface: Yeah ,  maybe to as  it it was indicated that   risk  of  repeated use , the injuries , maybe a touch screen could be a better option for that . user interface: So , a bigger b okay so y you're dividing designs based on not only segment age groups , you're desi  dividing it according to the countries also , the market . user interface: Maybe for U_S_ and all you can have a slightly bigger remote control industrial designer: Yeah . project manager: in the sense that they can make it smaller , or they can make it bigger or they can change the features slightly ,  . project manager: It's gonna be the same , so we need to focus on just one thing , not get bogged down in lots of different  possibilities ,  . I'm concerned , when you read the the R_S_I_ issue again , repetitive strain injury , I don't think just moving your finger around on a small screen is going to deal with that enough , I think that is still a kind of a question mark issue how we deal with that . marketing: I'm j I really can't get my head round this one , industrial designer: Yeah . marketing: this may have to be postponed to a future meeting but it's something we should think about . industrial designer: I yeah I was just thinking about how you could combat that 'cause without without doing something where you have to move your arm around to change the channel marketing:  . project manager: which is extremely expensive , industrial designer: but project manager: I think that's the only way that you kind of avoid that kind of issue . Do we have to initially  , you know looking at the findings here , focus on a younger age group initially and then broaden out the market later . user interface: If say people between age group of twenty to thirty five are the biggest market ? industrial designer: Ge  marketing: And when we've been throwing up our ideas we're automatically talking about business people , young people , trendy people . project manager: We are we're talking about  the type of company that we're working for as well . That they want  it to be fashionable , marketing: project manager: they want it to be trendy and you wouldn't automatically assume associate that with the older generations . project manager: Now with the baby boomers , the older generations are actually larger , they have a greater population than us young people , industrial designer: Yeah . project manager: but I don't think we're focusing on that , I think we are focusing on a sort of mid-range  , business kind of class type people . I'm just thinking of budgetary issues too , for when it does get to the sort of broad scale marketing stage , we want to , you know , not waste money , not be profligate project manager: marketing: and  you know focus on where the idea will be taken up , first it's most likely to be taken up first of all where the main purchasing power is coming from for a product like this . project manager: we've got the video , now there's  I can't remember what it's called , the little code at the end of programme details , industrial designer: Video plus . We could use that as an alternative to programming in times , things like that , is that industrial designer: Yeah yeah . project manager: because you've got your general record anyway so if you there's a programme on you want to put record on , that's fine , but if you do want to tape something in two days time and you're not sure if you're going to , you put the number in industrial designer: Just whack in the number . project manager: and it's just a number , it's not a date , it's not a time , it's not a channel , it's not when it finishes , it's not anything like that , industrial designer: And you w project manager: it's just a number . And you wouldn't you wouldn't need  a whole host of extra buttons for that , project manager: No . industrial designer: you just need one 'cause you've already got all the numbers there anyway , project manager: You've already got the numbers for typing in anyway . project manager: It is industrial designer: project manager: after  if you look in the newspaper , T_V_ guide or any T_V_ guide there's a five , six digit number afterwards industrial designer: It's not Yeah . project manager: and that's the number you put in and it's recorded that it's going to be on on Tuesdays at ten o'clock on the seventeenth marketing: Ah ,  . project manager: so you don't have to worry about dates and you don't have to worry about times , marketing: Right . industrial designer: It's been been around for a long time it's just it's not very well advertised as to how to use it and things . project manager: No it's not  but I think if awareness was kind of brought to the forefront about that marketing: Superb . industrial designer: Though if y if you've got something like Sky anyway you can just click on it you can just press the button on the programme once and it'll record that programme when it's on project manager:  . project manager: Okay so marketing: Can I just run this past you while it occurs to me , I don't mean to quickly jump from one subject to another , but just discussing the different age groups and targeting the different age groups it occurs to me , to produce our own mobile phones , that that's kind of what led us on to comparing T_V_ remote controls with with their design features , chain companies like Carphone Warehouse , you can pop in anytime with a phone that you bought for them w if you've got any problems with it and they'll fix it , industrial designer: Yeah . marketing: Is it worthwhile with with our retail outlets having a a similar  kind of service so that if older users were deterred from buying this , if they know they can just pop into one of our high street outlets , th you know , which button is it I press for this ? Th as free as a free aspect of our service , would that not make it more attractive to them ? industrial designer:  . project manager: industrial designer: But the only problem is that with a mobile phone you signed for a contract so they  the companies who  who you deal with have actually they've they've got an obligation to to help you out marketing:  . industrial designer: and also  it's it's fair enough to have some sort of help service but I I'm not sure how much the cost would be of having marketing: Right . project manager: The functionality of it in the sense that you're sitting there , you're pressing this button and your T_V_'s not doing it . Taking your T_V_ and your control and saying look this is what I'm doing , it's not working , what should I do ? marketing: Alright . Yes user interface: marketing: If it was something as simple as you couldn't change the channel , industrial designer: marketing: but  for if there were any more or are we absolutely definite it's only gonna be for T_V_ and video , project manager: I think so . project manager: there will be a customer service number thing that you can phone up and speak to industrial designer: Yeah . project manager: and that way there's no call out charge , there's no extra , t the person has to walk to a shop on the high street ,  . user interface: I think it will be too much of an effort for a person to for a phone maybe he might walk down the street , industrial designer: Yeah . industrial designer: And they're marketing: Not for such simple functions industrial designer: yeah , they should be f yeah . project manager: It does , industrial designer: It's the  project manager: you just put it in the drawer until something goes wrong industrial designer: yeah . project manager: and then you try and search through it , so that should be something we think about . project manager: what other functions ? We need I'm not sure if we need a design  decision now , but we should think about c 'cause you've got the dilemma between oh batteries , that's what I was thinking about . Mobile phone batteries , what kinda battery is that ? industrial designer:  they're they're specially made for the for the mobile phones , but they come with a charger ,  you could you could bundle a charger in with it but project manager: Well they la they they last quite a long time , industrial designer: project manager: and if you had  when you th the thing that you get with mobile house phones , you sit it in its charger when you're not using it or t at night or something , industrial designer: Yeah . project manager: but it doesn't really matter 'cause it never really runs out 'cause it lasts a long time once it is charged . industrial designer: Yeah and if yeah if you if you had if you had one of those  just coming back to your other point about pressing the button and setting off the bleeper in the room that could  project manager: Yeah it could be on that yeah , okay . user interface: So are we talking of a concept of a rechargeable something on the remote ? project manager: S industrial designer: Yeah project manager: Yes . industrial designer: and also that would mean they wouldn't have to go out buying batteries all the time . I don't wanna big box with lots of things , you don't want a tiny sort of little thing either , marketing: project manager: because then you have got the repetitive strain injury no matter how many how much you try and make it simple , marketing:  . project manager:  marketing: And we don't w  so many remote controls look absolutely identical , project manager: They do . marketing: these long , brown things with the same coloured buttons all crammed in on the s the surface . We definitely an ob an obvious thing , a very simple thing is to get away from these brown rectangles , we don't want that . project manager:  user interface: What I was thinking of a design which Nokia h  came up with almost six or seven years back . user interface: That's very strenuous because your thumb is slightly up , so they came up with something like this , curled up , so here , marketing: user interface: and you don't have to you don't bend your thumb too much , so it's like  you can say a banana shape kind of thing , curled up like a boat . user interface: G  so what happens is you don't have to press your thumb too down like . user interface: y yeah so we can have a s like you know moulded according to your marketing:  . user interface: the way you h hold of it's kind of semi-circular in the bottom , something like that . project manager: Can you look into the company logo ?  , things that are associated with the company in view to trying to incorporate that into the design of the product . project manager:  for example , if it was a C_ or something like that , you could have it in a vague C_ shape that opens up kind of like a shell , or something , user interface: project manager:  something along those lines to be able to incorporate it quite  obviously into the design , marketing: project manager: while also making it quite different from anything else that's there . What we were talking is to make it more rather than like sea-shells , marketing:  look at the mobile . user interface: logo could become as you could put a logo in the corner of  the model , rather than you know , trying to make it like a sea shell or whatever you were ta telling like . marketing: I think that's that sounds a really attractive idea , user interface: A sea shell ? marketing: I've not come across anything like that before , if it kind of yeah and that opens out into your flip-top . marketing: Then it's nice t to h you can make it lightweight plastic , nice to hold in the palm of the hand and just because you're having to actually insert in between the two covers , that's gonna take care of some of the repetitive strain injury trying p prevent a lot of that I would think . marketing: and plus you can get you know even though we're using plastic , you can still  think of the designs you can get in plastic , we can do a nice conch shell or scallop shell exterior . project manager: Or you could do  different , like you get with mobile phones , different fascias . project manager: So you could have like psychedelic ones for younger people and sleek ones and marketing: Yeah . Less chance of it being lost too , it's not like a chocolate brown lozenge that's gonna go down the sofa project manager: Yeah . marketing: and people might want to put it on their mantelpiece or whatever as a ki if it looks attractive enough as a kind of ornament they don't not gonna lose it so much either . user interface: Yeah maybe we could come at some say five , six des designs and then choose which are whichever appeals the most like , project manager: Okay . Right , I think we have to round it up ,  marketing: Can I just quickly  go over the new project requirements so that I haven't missed anything . marketing: So it's no teletext , it's only for T_V_ and by implication video , user interface: project manager: That was  in cutting down the number that was kinda separate that was cutting down the number of functions , making it simpler so instead of having lots of things you put in for date marketing: Right . Right , so when they press for programming you it comes up on the L_C_D_ , a reminder about using Videoplus ? So that they have a look at the guide and Or was is this nothing to do with the project requirements , is this just that was an add-on feature ? project manager: It's kinda takes the place of having a button to press for the date and having the button to press for the channel , things like that . Right , so it's kind of doing away with the programming feature ? project manager:  it could be it c It yes , industrial designer: Yeah . And it also paid  lip service in the instruction manual , 'cause it's very simple so putting it down in words should be helpful . marketing: Was there anything else there that we in the new new project requirements ? project manager:  user interface: Yeah . project manager: We've got the buttons but I think we'll work through that with the design of it ,  . That's not at the moment a requirement , it's something we're looking at , project manager: Yes . marketing: what preference so it may come round to market research at some point to see what people would like . project manager: And we've talked about  there being an alarm or something , a beeping for being lost ,  . But there aren't gonna be that func that many functions incorporated into it so it should be fine and the I the instruction manual , I don't know if we deal with that ,  . I think user interface: Yep , project manager: Yep , user interface: I think project manager: and different from what's out there . marketing: What would you specifically like marketing to look at before the next meeting ? industrial designer: Okay . marketing: Or shall I just sort of generally look at all the issues involved ? project manager: I think you might get guidance , but  I th Instruction manuals , 'cause there tends to be a demonised thing , marketing: Okay . project manager: u  , they're everyone's got like a big pile of them , but no one really uses them . user interface: I think it's time for us to get back to marketing: 'Cause we're at lunchtime now I think
I think we 've met before , like , I remember talking to you about Aspect or something like that at some point or other .  , apart from that , sort of the old gang , Johno and Bhaskara have been with us from from day one grad g: Yay ! grad e: Hi . grad c: and  they 're engaged in in various activities , some of which you will hear about today . Ami is  our counselor and spiritual guidance and  also interested in problems concerning reference of the more complex type , phd a: Well . grad c: And  hopefully it is by by means of Keith that we will be able to get a b a better formal and a better semantic  idea of what a construction is and  how we can make it work for us . Additionally his interest  surpasses  English because it also entails German , an extra capability of speaking and writing and understanding and reading that language . And  , is there anyone who doesn't know Nancy ? Do you do you know Nancy ? grad g: Me ? grad e: I know Nancy . grad g: What ? grad b: The " I don't know myself " joke . grad e: Man ! grad g: About me or you ? grad b: About me . grad g: It 's a grad c: And  Fey is with us as of six days ago officially ? undergrad d: Officially , grad c: Officially , undergrad d: yeah . grad c: but in reality already  much much longer and   next to some some more or less bureaucratic  stuff with the the data collection she 's also the wizard in the data collection  , grad g: Of Oz . grad c: we 're sticking with the term " wizard " , undergrad d: Yes .  , so we 're about to collect data and  the  s the following things have happened since we last met . grad c: what happened is that  , " A " , there was some confusion between you and Jerry with the that leading to your talking to Catherine Snow , and he was  he he agreed completely that some something confusing happened . It it 's exactly how you interpreted it , sort of s grad e: The list of majors in the department ? undergrad d: M m Majors ? grad c: Ma - majors , majors . undergrad d: Something I don't know about these grad g: The department has many mayors . grad c: Majors and  just sending the the little write - up that we did on to those email lists undergrad d: OK . grad c:  undergrad d: So it was really Carol Snow who was confused , not me and not Jerry . And  we have a little description of asking peop subjects to contact Fey for you know recruiting them for our thing and  there was some confusion as to the consent form , which is basically that that what what you just signed grad g: Right . grad c: and since we have one already  grad g: Did Jerry talk to you about maybe using our class ? the students in the undergrad class that he 's teaching ? grad c:  well he said  we definitely " yes " , grad g: e grad c: however there is always more people in a in a facul  in a department than are just taking his class or anybody else 's class at the moment grad g: Yeah . grad g: OK , but th I guess it 's that  people in his class cover a different set so than the c is the CogSci department that you were talking about ? undergrad d: I guess . See grad g:  reaching out to ? undergrad d: that 's what I suggested to him , that people like like Jerry and George and et cetera just grad g: Cuz we have you know people from other areas grad c: Yeah . undergrad d: Yeah or even I could you know I could do the actual grad c:   grad g: Cuz  I I know how to contact our students , undergrad d: That 's generally the way it 's done . grad g: so if there 's something that you 're sending out you can also s  send me a copy , grad c: Yeah . grad g: me or Bhaskara could either of us could post it to  is it undergrad d: A mailing list . grad g: if it 's a general solicitation that you know is just contact you then we can totally pro post it to the news group grad c:   undergrad d: That 's grad g: OK , so you 'll send it or something so . grad c: As a matter of fact , if you undergrad d: I can send it . grad c: if undergrad d: I 'll send it , grad g: You can send it to me . grad c: How however I suggest that if you if you look at your email carefully you may think you may find that you already have it . grad c: Anyhow ,  the  Yeah , not only Also we will talk about Linguistics and of course Computer Science . grad c:  and then , secondly , we had , you may remember ,  the problem with the re - phrasing , that subject always re - phrase sort of the task that  we gave them , grad b: Right . grad c: and so we had a meeting on Friday talking about how to avoid that , and it proved finally fruitful in the sense that we came up with a new scenario for how to get the the subject m to really have intentions and sort of to act upon those , and  there the idea is now that next actually we we need to hire one more person to actually do that job because it it 's getting more complicated . So if you know anyone interested in in what i 'm about to describe , tell that person to to write a mail to me or Jerry soon , fast .  the idea now is to sort of come up with a high level of sort of abstract tasks " go shopping "  " take in  a batch of art "  " visit do some sightseeing " blah - blah - blah - blah - blah , sort of analogous to what Fey has started in in in compiling compiling here and already she has already gone to the trouble of of anchoring it with specific  o  entities and real world places you will find in Heidelberg . So out of these f s these high level categories the subject can pick a couple , such as if if there is a cop  a category in emptying your roll of film , the person can then decide " OK , I wanna do that at this place " , sort of make up their own itinerary a and and tasks and the person is not allowed to take sort of this h high level category list with them , but  the person is able to take notes on a map that we will give him and the map will be a tourist 's sort of schematic representation with with symbols for the objects . And so , the person can maybe make a mental note that " ah yeah I wanted to go shopping here " and " I wanted to maybe take a picture of that " and " maybe  eat here " and then goes in and solves the task with the system , IE Fey , and  and we 're gonna try out that Any questions ? grad g: so  y you 'll have those say somewhere what their intention was so you still have the the nice thing about having data where you know what the actual intention was ? grad c:   grad g: But they will  There 's nothing that says you know " these are the things you want to do " so they 'll say " well these are the things I want to do " and Right , so they 'll have a little bit more natural interaction ? grad c: Hopefully . grad f: So they 'll be given this map , which means that they won't have to like ask the system for in for like high level information about where things are ? grad c: Yeah it 's a schematic tourist map . So it 'll be  i it 'll still require the that information and An grad g: It w it doesn't have like streets on it that would allow them to figure out their way grad c: N not not not really the street network . grad e: So you 're just saying like what part of town the things are in or whatever ? grad c: Yeah a and  the map is more a means for them to have the buildings and their names and maybe some ma ma major streets and their names grad g:   grad c: and we want to maybe ask them , if you have get it sort of isolated street the the , whatever , " River Street " , and they know that they have decided that , yes , that 's where they want to do this kind of action  that they have it with them and they can actually read them or sort of have the label for the object because it 's too hard to memorize all these st strange German names . And then we 're going to have another we 're gonna have w another trial run IE the first with that new setup tomorrow at two and we have a real interesting subject which is Ron Kay for who those who know him , he 's the founder of ICI . grad c: And he also approached me and he offered to help  our project and he was more thinking about some high level thinking tasks and I said " sure we need help you can come in as a subject " and he said " OK " . Which I 'll hopefully sort of scrape together t But , thanks to Fey , we already have sort of a nice blueprint and I can work with that . No ? No more questions ? grad e: I 'm not sure I totally understand this grad g: So what 's the s this is what you made , Fey ? grad c:  ? grad e: but I 'm not sure I totally understand everything that 's being talked about grad g: Like so So it 's just based on like the materials you had about Heidelberg . grad c:  are you familiar with with the with the very rough setup of the data ? grad e: but I I imagine I 'll c just catch on . undergrad d: Based on the web site , yeah , at the grad g: Oh OK there 's a web site grad c: experiment ? undergrad d: Right . grad g: and then you could like  figure out what the cate undergrad d: It 's a tourist information web site , grad e: this is where they 're supposed to undergrad d: so . grad c: The question is just sort of how do we get the tasks in their head that they have an intention of doing something and have a need to ask the system for something without giving them sort of a clear wording or phrasing of the task . grad c: Because what will happen then is that people repeat repeat , or as much as they can , of that phrasing . The The goals that we 've d you guys have been talking about are this these you know identifying which of three modes  their question  concerns . grad g: So it 's like the Enter versus View grad c: Yeah , we we we will sort of get a protocol of the prior interaction , grad g:  - huh . grad c: right ? That 's where the instructor , the person we are going to hire ,  and the subjects sit down together with these high level things grad g:  - huh . grad c: and so th the q first question for the subject is , " so these are things , you know , we thought a tourist can do . grad c: And the person can say " yeah , sure sh this is something I would do . Yeah ? and then we can sort of this s instructor can say " well ,  then you you may want to find out how to get over here grad g:   grad g: So the interaction beforehand will give them hints about how specific or how whatever though the kinds of questions that are going to ask during the actual session ? grad c: No . Just sort of OK , what what what would you like to buy and then  OK there you wanna buy a whatever cuckoos clocks grad g: Yeah . grad c: So the task then for that person is t finding out how to get there , right ? grad g:   grad c: And we know that the intention is to enter because we know that the person wants to buy a cuckoos clock . grad g: OK , that 's what  so like those tasks are all gonna be  unambiguous about which of the three modes . phd a: Well , so the idea is to try to get the actual phrasing that they might use and try to interfere as little as possible with their choice of words . In a sense that 's exactly the the the idea , phd a:   grad c: which is never possible in a in a s in a lab situation , phd a: Well , u u the one experiment th that that that I 've read somewhere , it was they u used pictures . We had exactly that on our list of possible way things so we  I even made a sort of a silly thing how that could work , how you control you are here you you want to know how to get someplace , and this is the place and it 's a museum and you want to do some and and and there 's a person looking at pictures . grad c: However , not only was the common census were among all participants of Friday 's meeting was it 's gonna be very laborious to to make these drawings for each different things , phd a: Right . grad c: all the different actions , if at all possible , and also people will get caught up in the pictures . phd a: I I 'm I 'm not saying it 's necessary but but  i   i you might be able to combine you know text  and and some sort of picture and also  I think it it will be a good idea to show them the text and kind of chew the task and then take the test away the the the the the text away grad c:   phd a: so that they are not  guided by by by what you wrote , grad c: We will phd a: but can come up with their with their own grad c: Yeah , they will have no more linguistic matter in front of them when they enter this room . Then I suggest we move on to the to we have   the EDU Project , let me make one more general remark , has sort of two two side   actions , its  action items that we 're do dealing with , one is modifying the SmartKom parser and the other one is modifying the SmartKom natural language generation module . And  this is not too complicated but I 'm just mentioning it put it in the framework because this is something we will talk about now .  , I have some news from the generation , do you have news from the parser ? grad f: not grad c: By that look I grad f: Yes , I would really p It would be better if I talked about it on Friday .  , did you run into problems or did you run into not h having time ? grad f: Yeah .  , meaning that Tilman Becker , who does the German one , actually took out some time and already did it in English for us . And so the version he 's sending us is already producing the English that 's needed to get by in version one point one . grad f: So I take it that was similar to the what what we did for the parsing ? grad c: Yeah . I I it even though the generator is a little bit more complex and it would have been , not changing one hundred words but maybe four hundred words , grad f: OK . grad c: but this this is I guess good news , and the  the time and especially Bhaskara and  and  Oh do I have it here ? No . It 's the last week of April until the fourth of May so it 's twenty - sixth through fourth . So it 's it 's extremely important that the two of you are also present in this town during that time . grad b: Wait , what what are the days ? April twenty - sixth to the May fourth ? grad c: Yeah , something like that . grad c: There is a d Isn't finals coming up then pretty much after that ? grad f: Finals was that . grad g: Yeah w it doesn't really have much meaning to grad students but final projects might . grad g: That grad c: Anyway , so this is grad b: Well I 'll be here working on something . Guaranteed , it 's just  will I be here , you know , in  I 'll be here too actually but phd a:  . grad c: No it 's just  you know they 're coming for us so that we can bug them grad g: Ye grad c: and ask them more questions and sit down together and write sensible code and they can give some nice talks and stuff . But  grad b: But it 's not like we need to be with them twenty - four hours a day s for the seven days that they 're here . It Just a mail that , you know , he 's sending me the the the stuff soon grad g: OK . grad c: and I and that 's also it 's it 's going to produce the concept - to - speech  blah - blah - blah information for necessary for one point one in English based on the English , you know , in English . grad c: we 're done ! " grad g: So that was like one of the first l You know , the first task was getting it working for English . grad c: when they have  changed the language model of the recognizer and the dictionary , then we can actually a put it all together grad g:   grad c: and you can speak into it and ask for TV and movie information grad e: Toll . grad c: and then when if if something actually happens and some answers come out , then we 're done . grad c: Then  grad g: Are they is it using the database ? the German TV movie . So all the actual data might be German names ? grad c:  well actually th  grad g: Or are they all like American TV programs ? grad c:  well grad e: I want to see " Die Dukes Von Hazard " grad c: The OK , so you don't know how the German dialogue  the German the demo dialogue actually works . It works the first thing is what 's , you know , showing on TV , and then the person is presented with what 's running on TV in Germany on that day , on that evening grad g:  -  ,   grad c: and so you take one look at it and then you say " well that 's really nothing there 's nothing for me there " " what 's running in the cinemas ? " So maybe there 's something better happening there . grad c: And then you get you 're shown what movies play which films , and it 's gonna be of course all the Heidelberg movies and what films they are actually showing . grad c: N grad g: It 's a  so would the generator , like the English language sentence of it is " these are the follow you know the following films are being shown " or something like that ? grad c: Yeah , but it in that sense it doesn't make In that case  it doesn't really make sense to read them out loud . grad c: But  it 'll tell you that this is what 's showing in Heidelberg and there you go . grad c: And the presentation agent will go " Hhh ! " Nuh ? grad g: OK . And then you pick pick a movie and and and it show shows you the times and you pick a time and you pick seats and all of this . grad c: But it 's so this time we we are at an advantage because it was a problem for the German system to incorporate all these English movie titles . grad c: Nuh ? But in English , that 's not really a problem , grad g: Right . grad c: unless we get some some topical German movies that have just come out and that are in their database . What 's the next thing ? grad b: e grad c: This is very rough but this is sort of what  Johno and I managed to come up with . The idea here is that grad b: This is the  s the schema of the XML here , not an example or something like that . grad c: Yeah this is not an XML this is sort of towards an a schema , grad e: OK . The idea is , so , imagine we have a library of schema such as the Source - Path - Goal and then we have forced  motion , we have cost action , grad e:   grad c: And they 're gonna be , you know , fleshed out in in their real ugly detail , Source - Path - Goal , and there 's gonna be s a lot of stuff on the Goal and blah - blah - blah , that a goal can be and so forth . This is a the fact that we 're calling this " action schema " right now should not entail that we are going to continue calling this " action schema " . But what that means is we have here first of all on the in the in the first iteration a stupid list of Source - Path - Goal actions grad b: Actions that can be categorized with or that are related to Source - Path - Goal . grad c: So a push may be in in in both you know push  in this or this  grad g: Forced motion and caused action for instance , grad c: Exactly . So this is something that , you know , may also be a res As a result of your work in the future , we may find out that , you know , there 're really s these subtle differences between  even within the domain of entering in the light of a Source - Path - Goal schema , that we need to put in fill in additional structure up there . It it is It was sort of a it gave us some headache , how do we avoid writing down that we have sort of the Enter Source - Path - Goal that this But this sort of gets the job done in that respect and maybe it is even conceptually somewhat adequate in a sense that  we 're talking about two different things . We 're talking more on the sort of intention level , up there , and more on the this is the your basic bone  schema , down there . When you point at the screen is it your shadow that I 'm supposed to look at ? grad g: Yeah . Whereas I keep looking where your hand is , and it doesn't grad c: Well , that wouldn't have helped you at all . grad b: Basically , what this is is that there 's an interface between what we are doing and the action planner grad e: Spit right here . grad b: and right now the way the interface is " action go " and then they have the what the person claimed was the source and the person claimed as the goal passed on . grad b: And the problem is , is that the current system does not distinguish between goes of type " going into " , goes of type " want to go to a place where I can take a picture of " , et cetera . grad c: So this is sort of what it looks like now , some simple " Go " action from it from an object named " Peter 's Kirche " of the type " Church " to an object named " Powder - Tower " of the type " Tower " . Right ? grad g: This is the  what the action planner uses ? grad b: Right . grad g: And is that and tha that 's changeable ? or not ? grad c: Yeah , well grad g: Like are we adapting to it ? grad c: No . grad g: Or grad c: We This is the output , sort of , of the natural language understanding , grad g: Oh , yeah . grad c: And what we are going to do , we going to and you can see here , and again for Johno please please focus the shadow , grad b: OK . grad c:  we 're gon   here you have the action and the domain object and w and on on grad g: What did you think he was doing ? grad b: I just grad g: OK , sorry . grad b: Robert likes to be abstract and that 's what I just thought he was doing . grad c: so as you can see this is on one level and we are going to add another  " Struct " , if you want , IE a rich action description on that level . grad c: So in the future grad g: So it 's just an additional information grad c: Exactly . In the future though , the content of a hypothesis will not only be an object and an an action and a domain object but an action , a domain object , and a rich action description , grad g: Right ? that doesn't hurt the current way . grad f: So  you had like an action schema and a Source - Path - Goal schema , grad g:  . grad f: right ? So how does this Source - Path - Goal schema fit into the  action schema ? Like is it one of the tags there ? grad g: Yeah can you go back to that one ? grad b: So the Source - Path - Goal schema in this case , I 've if I understand how we described we set this up ,  cuz we 've been arguing about it all week , but  we 'll hold the the Well in this case it will hold the  the the features I guess . I 'm not it 's hard for me to exactly s So basically that will store the the object that is w the Source will store the object that we 're going from , the Goal will store the the f grad e:   grad b: we 'll fill those in fill those roles in , right ? grad g: OK . grad b: The S Action - schemas basically have extra See we so those are schemas exist because in case we need extra information instead of just making it an attribute and which which is just one thing we we decided to make it 's own entity so that we could explode it out later on in case there is some structure that that we need to exploit . grad g: OK , so th sorry I just don't kn    This is just  XML mo notational but  the fact that it 's action schema and then sort of slash action schema that 's a whole entit grad b: That 's a block , yeah . grad g: That 's a block , whereas source is just an attribute ? grad c: No , no , no . Source meaning Source will be  will have a name , a type , maybe a dimensionality , grad g: Oh , OK , OK . OK could it it could also be blocked out then as grad b: Yeah , the So grad g: OK . grad c: s Source it will be , you know we 'll f we know a lot about sources so we 'll put all of that in Source . grad c: But it 's independent whether we are using the SPG schema in an Enter , View , or Approach mode , right ? grad g:   We can talk about Paths being the fastest , the quickest , the nicest and so forth ,  or or and the Trajector should be coming in there as well . So I guess the question is when you actually fill one of these out , it 'll be under action schema ? Those are It 's gonna be one y you 'll pick one of those for grad b: Right . grad g: OK these are this is just a layout of the possible that could go play that role . grad b: Right , so the the the roles will be filled in with the schema grad c:  ? grad g: OK , go it . grad b: and then what actual a action is chosen is will be in the in the action schema section . This was in this case it 's all  clear , sort of obvious , but you can think of the Enter , View and Approach as each having their roles , right ? the  it 's it 's implicit that the person that 's moving is doing entering viewing and approaching , but you know the usual thing is we have bindings between sort of they 're sort of like action specific roles and the more general Source - Path - Goal specific roles . grad c: What do you what do you grad g: What 's that ? Oh I guess it I I may be just  reading this and interpreting it into my head in the way that I 've always viewed things grad c:  . But if it is , then the top block is sort of like  , you know , you have to list exactly what X - schema or in this action schema , there 'll be a certain one , that has its own s structure and maybe it has stuff about that specific to entering or viewing or approaching , but those could include roles like the thing that you 're viewing , the thing that you 're entering , the thing that you 're grad e: So very specific role names are " viewed thing " , " entered thing " grad g: whatever , you know , that which are think think of enter , view and approach as frames grad c:   grad g: and you can also describe them in a general way as Source - Path - Goal schema and maybe there 's other image schemas that you could you know add after this that you know , how do they work in terms of you know a force dynamics grad c:   So all of those have  basically f either specific frame specific roles or more general frame specific roles that might have binding . grad g: and it 's not  I don't know if you wanna have in the same level as the action schema SPG schema it it 's somewhere in there that you need to represent that there is some container and the interior of it corresponds to some part of the Source - Path - Goal  you know goal  goal I guess in this case . grad g: So  is there an easy way in this notation to show when there 's identity basically between things grad c: Yeah . grad g: and I di don't know if that 's something we need to invent or you know just grad b: The wa wasn't there supposed to be a link in the grad f: Right . grad b: I don't know if this answers your question , I was just staring at this while you were talking , sorry . grad b:  a link between the action schema , a field in the s in the schema for the image schemas that would link us to which action schema we were supposed to use so we could grad c: Yeah .  , well that 's that 's one one thing is that we can link up , think also that  we can have one or m as many as we want links from from the schema up to the s action  description of it . grad c: But the notion I got from Nancy 's idea was that we may f find sort of concepts floating around i in the a action description of the action f " Enter " frame up there that are , e when you talk about the real world , actually identical to the goal of the the S Source - Path - Goal schema , grad g: Exactly . grad c: and do we have means of of telling it within that a and the answer is absolutely . grad c: The way we absolutely have those means that are even part of the M - three - L A API , grad g: Yeah . This referencing thing however is of temporary nature because sooner or later the W - three - C will be finished with their X - path , specification and then it 's going to be even much nicer . Then we have real means of pointing at an individual instantiation of one of our elements here grad g:   grad c: and link it to another one , and this not only within a document but also via documents , grad g:   grad g: So you know happen to know how what what " sooner or later " means like in practice ? grad c: That 's but it 's soon . grad c: So it 's g it 's the spec is there and it 's gonna part of the M - three - L AP API filed by the end of this year so that this means we can start using it basically now . grad b: Basically references from the roles in the schema the bottom schemas to the action schemas is wha  I 'm assuming . Yeah ,  personally , I 'm looking even more forward to the day when we 're going to have X forms , which l is a form of notation where it allows you to say that if the SPG action up there is Enter , then the goal type can never be a statue . grad g: So you have constraints that are dependent on the c actual s specific filler , of some attribute .  , you know this , of course , does not make sense in light of the Statue of Liberty , grad g:  - huh . grad c: Yeah ? grad f: S So  , like are you gonna have similar schemas for FM grad g: Or the Gateway Arch in St . grad f: like forced motion and caused action and stuff like you have for SPG ? grad c: Yeah . grad f: And if so like can are you able to enforce that you know if if it 's if it 's SPG action then you have that schema , if it 's a forced motion then you have the other schema present in the grad c:  we have absolute No . We have absolutely no means of enforcing that , so it would be considered valid if we have an SPG action " Enter " and no SPG schema , but a forced action schema . grad g: Whi - which is not bad , because  , that there 's multiple sens  that particular case , there 's mult there there 's a forced side of of that verb as well . grad c: What 's also nice , and for a i for me in my mind it 's it 's crucially necessary , is that we can have multiple schemas and multiple action schemas in parallel . grad c: And  we started thinking about going through our bakery questions , so when I say " is there a bakery here ? " you know I do ultimately want our module to be able to first of all f tell the rest of the system " hey this person actually wants to go there " and " B " , that person actually wants to buy something to eat there . Nuh ? And if these are two different schemas , IE the Source - Path - Goal schema of getting there and then the buying snacks schema , nuh ? grad g: Would they both be listed here in grad c: Yes . grad c: ye Yeah , they they would both schemas would appear , so what is the  is is there a " buying s snacks " schema ? grad e: Snack action . grad c: What is the  have grad g: What ? grad c: the buying snack schema ? grad e: See . undergrad d: Buying buying his food grad e: I 'm sure there 's a commercial event schema in there somewhere . grad g: Yeah I I grad c: Yeah ? So  so we would we would instantiate the SPG schema with a Source - Path - Goal blah - blah - blah grad g: I see . grad c: and the buying event you know at which however that looks like , the place f thing to buy . Would you say that the like  you could have a flat structure and just say these are two independent things , but there 's also this sort of like causal , well , so one is really facilitating the other and it 's part of a compound action of some kind , which has structure . Now it 's technically possible that you can fit schema within schema , and schema within schemata grad g:  I I think that 's nicer for a lot of reasons but might be a pain so  grad c:  Well , for me it seems that  r Yes . grad g:  there are truly times when you have two totally independent goals that they might express at once , but in this case it 's really like there 's a purpo means that you know f for achieving some other purpose . grad c: Well , if I 'm if I 'm recipient of such a message and I get a Source - Path - Goal where the goal is a bakery and then I get a commercial action which takes place in a bakery , right ? and and and they they are obviously , via identifiers , identified to be the same thing here . grad c: No , no , just the Yeah ? grad g: Yeah because they 're two different things one of which is l you could think of one a sub you know pru whatever pre - condition for the second . And they 're independently they they are events which have very different characters as far as Source - Path - Goal whatever . grad g: So when you identify Source - Path - Goal and whatever , there 's gonna to be a desire , whatever , eating , hunger , whatever other frames you have involved , they have to match up in in nice ways . So it seems like each of them has its own internal structure and mapping to these schemas grad c:   grad g: you know from the other But you know that 's just That 's just me . grad c: Well , I think we 're gonna hit a lot of interesting problems grad g: Like I I grad c: and as I prefaced it this is the result of one week of arguing about it grad g:   grad e: Yeah  I I still am not entirely sure that I really fully grasp the syntax of this . grad b: Well it 's not it 's not actually a very actually , it doesn't actually grad c:  it occur it occurs to me that  ne grad e: You know , like what Right . grad c:  well I should have we should have added an ano an XML example , grad e: Yeah . grad c: and and this is on on a on on my list of things until next next week . grad c: It 's also a question of the recursiveness and and a hier hierarchy  in there . grad c: Do we want the schemas just blump blump blump blump ?  it 's if we can actually you know get it so that we can , out of one utterance , activate more than one schema , then we 're already pretty good , grad g:   grad c: right ? phd a: Well well you have to be careful with that   thing because   many actions presuppose some  almost infinitely many other actions . phd a: You have a further specific intentions to left to lift your right foot grad c:  ? phd a: and so    y you really have to focus on on on grad g: Right . phd a: and decide the level of of abstraction that that you aim at it kind of zero in on that , grad c: Yeah . phd a: and more or less ignore the rest , unless there is some implications that that you want to constant draw from from sub - tasks  that are relevant   but very difficult . grad g: M Th The other thing that I just thought of is that you could want to go to the bakery because you 're supposed to meet your friend there or som phd a: Yeah . grad g: you know so you like being able to infer the second thing is very useful and probably often right . grad b: Well the the the utterance was " is there a bakery around here ? " , grad g: But having them separate grad b: not " I want to go to a bakery . " grad g: Well maybe their friend said they were going to meet them in a bakery around the area . grad g: And I 'm , yeah I 'm I 'm inventing contexts which are maybe unlikely , phd a: Right . grad g: but yeah  like but it 's still the case that  you could you could override that default by giving extra information grad c:  -  , yeah . grad g: which is to me a reason why you would keep the inference of that separate from the knowledge of " OK they really want to know if there 's a bakery around here " , grad c: Yeah . grad c: Well there there there should never be a hard coded  shortcut from the bakery question to the  double schema thing , grad g: Right . grad c: how  And , as a matter of fact , when I have traveled with my friends we make these exactly these kinds of appointments . It 's I met someone at the bakery you know in the Victoria Station t you know train station London before , phd a: Right . It 's like phd a: So the Enter - View - Approach the the the EVA  , those are fixed slots in this particular action . Or or or or will it just   is it change grad e: Every SPG every SPG action either is an Enter or a View or an Approach , phd a: Right , right . grad e: right ? phd a: So so I  for for each particular action that you may want to characterize you would have some number of slots that define    you know in some way what this action is all about . So is it a fixed number or or do you leave it open it could be between one and fifteen  it 's it 's it 's flexible . grad c: the  Well , it sort of depends on on if you actually write down the the schema then you have to say it 's either one of them or it can be none , or it can be any of them . However the  it seems to be sensible to me to r to view them as mutually exclusive  maybe even not . grad g: J Do you mean within the Source - Path - Goal actions ? phd a:  ye   b I  I u I understand grad c: Yeah . grad g: Those three ? phd a:  but grad c: And  how how where is the end ? So that 's phd a: No , no . There a a actually by I think my question is simpler than that ,  is OK , so you have an SPG action and and it has three different   aspects  because you can either enter a building or view it or or approach it and touch it or something .  now you define  another action , it 's it 's called   s S P G - one grad c: Forced action or forced motion . And i in in a way similar to either Enter - View - Approach you may want to send a letter , read a letter , or dictate a letter , let 's say . So , h grad b: Oh the OK  maybe I 'd The  These actions I don't know if I 'm gonna answer your question or not with this , but the categories inside of action schemas , so , SPG action is a category . Real although I think what we 're specifying here is this is a category where the actions " enter , view and approach " would fall into because they have a related Source - Path - Goal schema in our tourist domain . Cuz viewing in a tourist domain is going up to it and or actually going from one place to another to take a picture , in this in a phd a: Right . Oh , s so it 's sort of automatic derived fr from the structure that that is built elsewhere . grad b: derived I don't know if I u grad e: This is a cate this a category structure here , grad b: Right . What are some types of action schemas ? Well one of the types of action schemas is Source - Path - Goal action . So if I want to go from outside to inside then you 'd have the roles that need to filled , where you 'd have a Source - Path - Goal set of roles . So you 'd the Source would be outside and Path is to the door or whatever , right ? phd a: Right . grad b: So if you wanted to have a new type of action you 'd create a new type of category . Then this category would we would put it or not necessarily We would put a new action in the m  in the categories that in which it has the  Well , every action has a set of related schemas like Source - Path - Goal or force , whatever , right ? grad e:   grad b: So we would put " write a letter " in the categories  that in which it had it w had  schemas u grad e: There could be a communication event action or something like that grad b: Exactly . grad b: And then later , you know , there the we have a communication event action where we 'd define it down there as grad g:  . So there 's a bit a redundancy , right ? in in which the things that go into a particular You have categories at the top under action schema and the things that go under a particular category are  supposed to have a corresponding schema definition for that type . So I guess what 's the function of having it up there too ?  I guess I 'm wondering whether You could just have under action schema you could just sort of say whatever you know it 's gonna be Enter , View or Approach or whatever number of things grad c:   grad g: and pos partly because you need to know somewhere that those things fall into some categories . And it may be multiple categories as you say which is  the reason why it gets a little messy grad c: Yeah . grad g:  but if it has if it 's supposed to be categorized in category X then the corresponding schema X will be among the structures that that follow . grad g: That 's like grad c: th this is this r grad g: OK , sorry . grad c: this is this is more this is probably the way that th that 's the way that seemed more intuitive to Johno I guess grad g: You didn't tell me to grad c: also for a while for grad g:  - huh . grad b: The the reason One reason we 're doing it this way is in case there 's extra structure that 's in the Enter action that 's not captured by the schemas , grad g: I it 's easy to go back and forth isn't it ?  - huh . grad b: right ? grad g: Which is why I would think you would say Enter and then just say all the things that are relevant specifically to Enter . grad b: Right , but grad e: Ri - You 'd like so you 're saying you could practically turn this structure inside out ? or something , or ? grad g:  Ye - I see what you mean by that , grad c: No basically w grad g: but I I don't if I would I would need to have t have that . grad c: Get get rid of the sort of SPG slash something  or the sub - actions category , grad g: Right . grad c:  and I agree that you know this is something we need to discuss , grad g: I in fact what you could say is for Enter , grad c: yeah . grad g: you could say " here , list all the kinds of schemas that on the category that grad e: List all the parent categories . So you would say enter and you 'd say my parent frames are such - and - such , h and then those are the ones that actually you then actually define and say how the roles bind to your specific roles which will probably be f richer and fuller and have other stuff in there . This sounds like a paper I 've read around here recently in terms of grad g: Yeah it could be not a coincidence . Like I said , I 'm sure I 'm just hitting everything with a hammer that I developed , grad e: Yeah . grad g: but  you know  it 's I 'm just telling you what I think , you just hit the button and it 's like grad c: And , I guess fr  grad e: Yeah  but there 's a good question here . Like ,   do you When do you need Damn this headset ! When you this  , eh grad g: Metacomment . I just don't see why you would  does th Who uses this  this data structure ? You know ? Like , do you say " alright I 'm going to  do an SPG action " . And then you know somebody ne either the computer or the user says " alright , well , I know I want to do a Source - Path - Goal action so what are my choices among that ? " And " oh , OK , so I can do an Enter - View - Approach " . It 's not like that , right ? It 's more like you say " I want to ,  I want to do an Enter . " grad b: Well only one of grad e: And then you 're more interested in knowing what the parent categories are of that . Right ? So that the  the  sort of representation that you were just talking about seems more relevant to the kinds of things you would have to do ? grad b: I 'd I grad g:  . grad b: if we if our if our module decided that Enter is the case , View and Approach will not be there . grad c: Well  it 's it sort of came into my mind that sometimes even two could be on , and would be interesting . grad c:  nevertheless  grad e: Mayb - Well maybe I 'm not understanding where this comes from and where this goes to . grad b: Well in that case , we can't we can't w if if grad c: l let 's let 's not grad g: OK . grad b: well the thing is if that 's the case we our I don't think our system can handle that currently . grad e: What are we doing with this ? grad c: No , not at all . " grad c: the I think the in some sense we we ex get the task done extremely well grad g: Run like this  grad c: because this is exactly the discussion we need need . grad g: No , this is the useful , grad c: and  and and I th I hope grad g: you know , don don't worry . grad c: And it 's gonna get more and more complex the the l complexer and larger our domains get . grad b: The r  the in terms of why is it 's laid out like this versus some other grad c: the people grad e: Yeah . grad b:  that 's kind of a contentious point between the two of us but this is one wa so this is a way to link  the way these roles are filled out to the action . grad b: Because if we know that Enter is a t is an SPG action , grad e:   grad b: we know to look for an SPG schema and put the appropriate fill in the appropriate roles later on . grad g: And you could have also indicated that by saying " Enter , what are the kinds of action I am ? " grad c:  -  , yeah . grad g: Right ? So there 's just like sort of reverse organization , right ? So like unless @ @ Are there reasons why one is better than the other  that come from other sources ? grad e: Again grad c: Yes because nobod no the modules don't grad g: Yeah .  grad c: This is this is a schema that defines XML messages that are passed from one module to another , grad g:   grad c: mainly meaning from the natural language understanding , or from the deep language understanding to the action planner . grad c: Now the the reason for for not using this approach is because you always will have to go back , each module will try have to go back to look up which  you know entity can have which  , you know , entity can have which parents , and then So you always need the whole body of of y your model  to figure out what belongs to what . grad c: nuh ? So you always send up " here I am I am this person , and I can have these parents " in every message . grad c: which e grad g: OK , so it 's just like a pain to have to send it . grad c: It may or may not be a just a pain it 's it 's I 'm completely willing to to to throw all of this away grad g: OK , I understand . grad c: and completely redo it , grad e: Well grad c: you know and and and it after some iterations we may just do that . grad e: I I would just like to ask  like , if it could happen for next time , just beca cuz I 'm new grad c:   grad e: and I don't really just I just don't know what to make of this and what this is for , and stuff like that , you know , so if someone could make an example of what would actually be in it , grad c: Yeah . grad e: like first of all what modules are talking to each other using this , grad c: Yeah , we I will promise for the next time to have fleshed out N XML examples for a a run through and and see how this this then translates , grad e: right ? And OK . grad c: And  is there more to be said ? I think  In principle what I I think that this approach does , and e e whether or not we take the Enter - View and we all throw up up the ladder  wha how do how does Professor Peter call that ? grad g: Yeah . grad c: The  hhh , silence su sublimination ? Throwing somebody up the stairs ? Have you never read the Peter 's Principle anyone here ? grad e: Nope . phd a: Oh ,  grad f: People reach their level of  max their level of at which they 're incompetent or whatever . grad c: OK , so we can promote Enter - View all all up a bit and and get rid of the  blah - blah - X - blah  asterisk sub - action item altogether . grad c: and we w we we will play around with all of them but the principal distinction between having the the pure schema and their instantiations on the one hand , and adding some whatever , more intention oriented specification  on parallel to that that this approach seems to be  workable to me . grad g: Although  roles grad b: So I I do I 'm I 'm not grad c: I 'm I 'm never happy when he uses the word " roles " , grad g: Yeah I I grad c: I 'm grad g: Yeah . I was going to grad b: I b  ROLLS so grad g: Bread rolls ? grad e: Oh you meant pastries , then ? grad b: Yeah , pastries is what I 'm talking about . grad e: Help ! grad g: I guess I 'll agree to that , then . grad g: I n Didn't you say something about Friday , grad c: Yeah . grad c: So it looks like you have not been partaking , the Monday at three o ' clock time has turned out to be not good anymore . So people have been thinking about an alternative time and the one we came up with is Friday two - thirty ? three ? What was it ? grad b: You have class until two , right ? so if we don't want him if we don't want him to run over here grad f:   grad c: Two - th Two - thirty - ish or three or Friday at three or something around that time . grad c: And I know that you have until three You 're busy ? grad e:  undergrad d: Yeah . Yeah  earlier on Friday is better but three you know  if it were a three or a three thirty time then I would take the three or whatever , grad c:   grad c: You are more than welcome if you think that this kind of discussion gets you anywhere in in your life then  you 're free to c undergrad d: It 's fascinating . " undergrad d: I 'm just glad that I don't have to work it out grad c:  undergrad d: because . grad c:  ? undergrad d: I 'm just glad that don't have to work it out myself , that I 'm not involved at all in the working out of it because . phd a: So it 's at Friday at three ? there that 's grad c: And  grad e: So already again this week , grad c: How diligent do we feel ? grad e: huh ? grad c: Yeah . So  clearly there 's I can talk about the  the parser changes on Friday at least , grad c: OK , Bhaskara will do the big show on Friday . grad g: And you guys will argue some more ? grad b: And between now and then yeah . grad g: and have some ? grad c: We will r grad e: Promise ? grad g: probably . grad g: And we 'll get the summary like , this the c you know , short version , like phd a: An - and I would like to second Keith 's request . grad g: S phd a: An example wo would be nice t to have kind of a detailed example . I 've I 've I 've I guess I 'm on record for promising that now . grad c: This is it and  grad b: The other good thing about it is Jerry can be on here on Friday and he can weigh in as well . and  if you can get that binding point also maybe with a nice example that would be helpful for Johno and me . let 's  yeah they 're grad c: Give us undergrad d: No problem , grad e: I think you 've got one on hand , undergrad d: yeah . grad c: Well the the the binding is technically no problem but it 's it for me it seems to be conceptually important that we find out if we can s if if there if there are things in there that are sort of a general nature , we should distill them out and put them where the schemas are . grad c: If there are things that you know are intention - specific , then we should put them up somewhere , a grad g: So , in general they 'll be bindings across both intentions and the actions . grad g: it 's like  Shastri would say you know binding is like an essential cognitive  process . grad g: So I don't think it will be isolated to one or the two , but you can definitely figure out where Yeah , sometimes things belong and So actually I 'm not sure I would be curious to see how separate the intention part and the action part are in the system . Like I know the whole thing is like intention lattice , or something like that , grad c:   grad g: right ? So is the ri right now are the ideas the rich rich the RAD or whatever is one you know potential block inside intention . grad g: and then that 's just one way to describe the the action part of it . grad c: it 's an an it 's it 's sort of grad g: Not just that you want to go from here to here , it 's that the action is what you intend grad c: Yeah . grad g: and this action consists of all com complicated modules and image schemas and whatever . And and there will be a a a relatively high level of redundancy grad g: So . which is , yeah , It 's fine grad c: so th so that if we want to get really cocky we we will say " well if you really look at it , you just need our RAD . grad c: Because you 're not gonna get anymore information out of the action a as you find it there in the domain object . grad c: But then again  in this case , the domain object may contain information that we don't really care about either . grad c: H But w we 'll see that then , and how how it sort of evolves . grad c:  if if people really like our our RAD ,  w what might happen is that they will get rid of that action thing completely , you know , and leave it up for us to get the parser input  grad g: Mmm . We know the things that make use of this thing so that we can just change them so that they make use of RAD . grad g: Is the But what is the " why " ? grad e: It 's rad , even ! grad b: Why ? grad g: Why ? grad e: It happened to c be what it stands for . grad c: ye no but i undergrad d: Just think of it as as " wheel " in German . grad c: but if you if you if you work in th in that XML community it is a great acronym grad g: Do you see what  ? Like grad c: because it e evokes whatever RDF grad g: Oh . grad c: RDF is the biggest thing right ? That 's the rich sort of " Resource Description Framework " grad e: Oh " rich de " grad g: Oh . grad c: and  and also So , description , having the word d term " description " in there is wonderful , grad g:   grad g: But what if it 's not an action ? grad c: It 's it 's rad , undergrad d: Yeah all the kids 'll love it .  are the are the sample data that you guys showed sometime ago like the things maybe maybe you 're gonna run a trial tomorrow . Cuz it 'd be nice for me to like look if I 'm thinking about examples I 'm mostly looking at child language which you know will have some overlap but not total with the kinds of things that you guys are getting . grad g: and maybe you 've posted it before but where would I look if I want to see ? grad c: Oh I You want audio ? grad g: You know . grad g: OK , well don't don't make it a high priority grad c: Yeah . grad g: I In fact if you just tell me like you know like two examples grad c:   grad g: y The the the representational problems are I 'm sure , will be there , grad c: OK
Item 3 this morning then is a scrutiny session on early childhood education and care, and I'm very pleased to welcome Julie Morgan AM, Deputy Minister for Health and Social Services; Jo-anne Daniels, director of communities and tackling poverty at Welsh Government; and Nicola Edwards, deputy director of the childcare, play and early years division in Welsh Government. If you're happy, we'll go straight into questions, and the first ones are from Hefin David. What are your primary objectives? Is it supporting the development of children or getting parents into work? julie morgan am: Well, I think you'll be aware from the range of programmes that we've got that we do feel its important to support both children and parents. There's obviously lots of evidence to show how important the early years are for children, how important they are for their development, and so, that is one of our primary objectives. But we also know how important it is for parents to have stable jobs, reasonably paid, so that can also help with the development of the children. So, we really see it that our plans are for both parents and children, and we believe that a high-quality, early-childhood education and care system can provide that. And, of course, in terms of when we talk about jobs as well, I think its really important to remember that the childcare system is a big employer as well and a very important employer. hefin david am: So, the evidence we've seen suggests that, historically, Governments in the UK and devolved have focused on primarily getting parents into work. So, are you suggesting then that your focus is to change that and move towards early child development? julie morgan am: No, what I'm saying is that we want to give parents the opportunity to work. We don't want childcare to be a barrier to parents working because we think that working is one the best routes out of poverty, but we do also want to make sure that children have the greatest experience that they can have in the early years. julie morgan am: The situation as it is is complex, and I think it needs simplifying. It is a challenge, but its probably one of the most important challenges we've got in Government, because what we offer to families with young children is one of the most important things we do. hefin david am: And in your evidence to the committee, you said that the Welsh Governments approach 'will build on a wide variety of programmes that are continually developing in order to support parents, families and children during the early years.' And you've just said you want to simplify that. How do you simplify that, particularly with regard to the provision of funding and the way these things connect from the birth of a child into school? How will simplification look, and what will happen? julie morgan am: Well, we're not at the stage of being able to say what it will look like at the moment, but we're looking at ways of simplifying, because I think its absolutely right, it is a very complex system, because its grown up from all different routes. We have got pathway projects in, I think its eight local authorities, who are looking at ways of joining up the whole system. So, we are looking at that, and I absolutely except that it is very complex and we want to find ways of making it simpler and easier to understand. So, we are working with local authorities and health boards to see how we can actually work together and simplify things. Can I just come back to the first thing you said: 'We can't say yet what we're going to do'? julie morgan am: No. hefin david am: So, when will we have a policy plan and something that we can interrogate in more detail? julie morgan am: Well, I think we are near getting to an announcement where we will be able to say what direction we're going in, and because we have had. Some of this work has been going on for a year or so, and we're getting the results of those pathfinder projects coming in. So, when we do have all those results, we will be able to say the direction that we want to go in, and I hope we'll be able to do that very soon. And finally from me julie morgan am: I'm sorry I can't say too much about that because we haven't actually. And if that's as far as you're willing to go, then I'll stop asking. sian gwenllian am: I just want to understand a little about the pilot, the pathfinders in eight local authority areas. Is the focus there on the child or is it on parents returning to work? julie morgan am: The focus is on an early years system, but we've worked both locally and nationally. , actually, I think, perhaps, Nicola, would you like to or one of you like to describe one of the programmes? sian gwenllian am: And can you just explain the vision? Is it a child-centred early years provision that we're thinking of in these pathfinder? jo-anne daniels: So, in 'Prosperity for All', we set out that early years was one of the key priority areas, and within that we said that we wanted to create a more joined-up and more responsive system. So, when we talk about a system, we're talking about the services that are provided by health boards, so health visiting, midwifery, speech and language support, other kinds of therapeutic services, as well as all the important services that local authorities are providing, such as support for parenting, advice and guidance, employment support and childcare, obviously. So, Flintshire, Newport, Blaenau Gwent, Neath Port Talbot, Swansea, Ceredigion, Pembrokeshireand then I've missed one, I think, because I've only got to sevenwho have been working with us to look at how all of those services are currently delivered in their local area and whether and how they can reorganise those services to improve accessibility, to improve take-up, but essentially to improve the efficacy of those programmes in terms of supporting children, but often, obviously, in supporting children you have to support parents too and support the home. sian gwenllian am: So, would you say it's a child-centred approach? jo-anne daniels: Absolutely, because it's about making sure that we deliver the best start in life for children in Wales, but obviously parents are a critical element of that, so can't be excluded. lynne neagle am: And how long have they been going for? jo-anne daniels: So, those eight pathfinders started their work inI think it wasFebruary this year. And they're still in the very early stages in terms of actually unpicking and mapping the current provision of services across their areas and then moving on to the stage where they'll develop proposals for how they might change the delivery of early years. julie morgan am: Just to say also, the one in Flintshire is also testing the impact of consistent funding rates for education and childcare. So, that's another important area because there's an evaluation of that project under way at the moment. jo-anne daniels: Sorry, but Caerphilly was the one that I forgot to mention. hefin david am: In your report, the 'Alignment of the Childcare Offer for Wales to the Foundation Phase', one of the recommendations was that 'The Welsh Government, local authority education and childcare policy and delivery teams could merge'. So, looking behind the scenes, those disparate parts of policy, delivering the foundation phase and childcare offer should merge. Is that the case? Has that been put under way and should we be looking at this structure in more depth? julie morgan am: Well, probably not at the structure at this time because the report that you're referring to was looking at the first year of the delivery of the childcare offer and it did make a number of points, which we have taken on board. For example, we issued guidance last year regarding the delivery of the foundation phase, which supports widening the number of non-maintained settings that are able to deliver early education and we're also supporting co-location and partnership working between education and childcare providers through our capital investment programme. I think it's about 81 million that we put into the capital investment where we are developingchildcare facilities co-located with the education facilities, because that was one of the things that came out from this report you're referring to. And, obviously, early years is one of the key priorities within 'Prosperity for All' and, obviously, education sits within one portfolio with the Minister for Education, and childcare is with me. But we're doing what we can to work together to try to bring those together, and that was one of the proposals in that report. hefin david am: And I remember when you were on the committee here with me, sitting next to me, we had those discussions about co-location. I know the problem with not having co-location is that you could end up seeing a child travelling between three or more locations during the course of a day. Are you suggesting now that the actions you're taking will resolve that issue universally, or will it lead to a piecemeal resolution? And, if so, to what extent, what percentage of children will see that resolved as an issue? julie morgan am: Certainly, the co-location is not going to solve it universally because although we've been able to develop a lot of new facilities, or build on old facilities, there will be a lot of areas that we won't have covered. So, I can't say that there's going to be a situation where everything is going to be co-located because I don't think that would be feasible, and,for some of the providers, they wouldn't be in a position to move to a school. But ideally it's a good situation, but, certainly, I think the discussions that there were on the committee, it's not ideal to take children for long distances between different providers, let alone the effect it has on the climate change issue. So, I can't say that they will ever be co-located, but as I said in response to your earlier question, we are encouraging the development of the foundation phase in non-maintained settings, which, obviously, is quite significant. What is the Welsh Government doing to address the big differences in the amount of early childhood education and care provision available in different parts of Wales? julie morgan am: Right. , obviously, it would be good to see a greater degree of consistency, but I think it's important to acknowledge that there are reasons for that variation. Now, early education, of course, is the responsibility of the Minister for Education, and we are aware that different local authorities have adopted different patterns of providing early education. For example, local authorities are funded to provide 10 hours minimum of the foundation phase for three and four-year-olds across Wales, but there's quite a variance in how much is actually provided, with some local authorities providing a lot more historically. So, it does mean that there is a different pattern across Wales, according to what local authorities do. But what I could say is, of course, the quality is very good, as the Estyn reports have shown; that the quality provided, the delivery of the foundation phase, is very good. But it does vary in terms of what is offered throughout Wales, and that is the decision of the local authorities, and it is a historical thing. I refer to this pilot in Flint, which is trying to test paying the same rate for foundation phase and childcare. We're going to have an independent evaluation on that soon, in November this year, so that will help us. Obviously, I think local authorities' role in all this is absolutely crucial because they are the local, nearest people to decide how things develop in their own areas. And then, of course, we've got Flying Start, which is geographically targeted, which uses the data from income benefit to decide which are the areas where that is being delivered. And that is delivered where the highest proportion of children aged nought to three are living in income-dependent households. With Flying Start being geographically targeted, with the education being determined by the local authorities about how much there is, we know that there is a variance throughout Wales. We'd like to see facilities developed in each local authority throughout Wales that would answer the needs of the families and the children in those areas. lynne neagle am: Before you move on, Janet, Sin's got a supplementary. sian gwenllian am: Just in terms of the foundation phase, there have been cuts, of course, in expenditure in that phase. How concerned are you about that and the impact that that will have on the way in which the foundation phase is taught in our schools? The foundation phase is now part of the education improvement grant, which has seen a reduction of 10 per cent, and it has to compete against other expenditure streams within that greater pot of funding. So, are you concerned that money is being lost and that that will have an impact on standards in the foundation phase? julie morgan am: I haven't seen any evidence. Obviously, I must reiterate the foundation phase does come under the Minister for Education, but I haven't seen any evidence of any standards being lowered, and the reports from Estyn are very good. In fact, I think the foundation phase is one of our great joys, that we absolutely celebrate it, and so I'd be very concerned if I thought there was any drop in standards in the foundation phase, and I certainly haven't had any evidence of that. sian gwenllian am: Exactly, but if there are fewer teaching assistants in the system because of the cuts, it's going to impact on standards, at the end of the day. julie morgan am: I think we have to be very careful to see that lower standards are not implemented, because it was groundbreaking when we brought it in, and it has proved to be a great success, so we want to make sure that's guarded. janet finch-saunders am: Going back to my original question about the big differences in amounts of early childhood education and care provision in different parts of Wales, the Welsh and UK Governments have followed a demand-driven approach to the childcare market, with subsidies mainly given to working parents. Is that a mistake? Should it be more universally available? julie morgan am: Well, some of our provision is universally available in certain areas. For example, the Flying Start provision is universally available in geographically defined areas, and I think that's very important, because that does mean that there isn't stigma, and so,in those areas, everybody can take advantage of it, and yet it is reaching those who are most in need because it's reaching those areas. In terms of when you say demand led, could you elaborate on that? janet finch-saunders am: I know thatwe've just had a useful briefing fromDavid Dallimore, and, basically, there is this theory that there are too many resourcesthe demand-driven approach is based more on certain factors: geographic spread in terms of it being more universal, and whether that's the right way. How do children then mix with peers from different backgrounds, in their own peer or age group? julie morgan am: It is demand nicola edwards: [Inaudible.]because the offer is targeted at working parents janet finch-saunders am: Yes, yes. nicola edwards: obviously, then the amount of availability is based on how many parents apply for it and take it up. julie morgan am: It is universally available to all parents who meet the eligibility criteria of working, and I think what you're saying is that it should be available to everybody. lynne neagle am: I think the point that Janet's making is that some areas have traditionally got more childcare anyway because they have traditionally had more demand in those areas, so there's not a level playing field to start from. julie morgan am: I think that, historically, that is definitely true, and when you look at the take-up of the childcare offer, it's certainly taken up in some areas with a very high take-up rate. I think Ynys Mn was nearly 90 per cent or something sian gwenllian am: They need more money, because they haven't got enough funding. julie morgan am: In other areas, it's much, much lowerin some of the cities, I know. So, there is a big range in take-up janet finch-saunders am: So, do you intend to bring something forward to address that? julie morgan am: We are planning to extend it. Obviously, we have to wait for the evaluationof that.It would be great to be able to offer it to absolutely everybody, but obviously we have got the finance to look at in terms of how we do that. janet finch-saunders am: Does the Welsh Government intend to develop an integrated approach, then, against all settings? If so, given the current inconsistencies, how can quality be assured? julie morgan am: We are developing a more integrated approach towards the early years. As I've said, we're trying to have the foundation phase operating in more non-maintained settings, and we're already developing that. But Estyn and CIW will continue to inspect and regulate the early years sector to ensure standards, and, since January 2019, CIW and Estyn have moved to joint inspections for the non-maintained settings that are offering the foundation phase. So, that is a very positive move, I think, and is absolutely making sure that standards are maintained, because if we are having the foundation phase in non-maintained settings, that is a challenge where we want to be sure that the standards and the philosophy of the foundation phase are maintained. janet finch-saunders am: And finally from me, what specific steps have been put in place to take forward the commitments from the Welsh Government's 2017 childcare/play early years workforce plan to build a better understanding of the workforce's Welsh language skills to enable support for the sector to be targeted and to identify where capacity needs to be built for the future to meet the needs of the early years sector in a bilingual Wales? julie morgan am: We think this is very important, and we're pleased that 29 per cent of children taking up the childcare offer are in Welsh or bilingual settings, so we think that's very good. We have established a specific programme to develop Welsh language skills in the childcare and play workforce with the National Centre for Learning Welsh, to develop workplace Welsh language skills across the sector. So, we're actually working with that, and I think you've done something with those recently, haven't you? I don't know if you want to nicola edwards: Yes. So, we have a stakeholder group where we've brought together a variety of people with an interest in the early years, childcare and play sectors, and we had a presentation just last month from the national language centre about the education programmes that they're rolling out, and how this is all coming together, which is quite interesting. We've been working quite carefully to make sure that the variety of work-based learning programmes that we provide and offer are also available in Welsh and bilingually. Recruiting and retaining staff with really good Welsh language skills adds an extra dimension to it, andthat it's a point that Mudiad Meithrin makes to us quite regularly, that they do struggle to find staff with the right skills. So, upskilling the existing workforce is a key part of it, but also doing more to attract people in with Welsh language skills in the first place in terms of the training courses that we're taking forward, and thinking about that in the context of the targets within Cymraeg 2050 and the aim to get to one million Welsh speakers. So, as the Deputy Minister said, we've got quite a number of children accessing the offer in Welsh-medium or bilingual settings at the moment. We're going to be doing some baselining work against that in terms of local authorities' Welsh in education strategic plans and education places, and what we can then do to increase the number of childcare places in parallel with that so that you can make sure that you start that pathway through learning Welsh, interacting with education and childcare through Welsh at a much earlier stage. suzy davies am: Just on this early point, anybody who's been through the Welsh education system, which is 20 years now, will have some Welsh language skills, obviously to differing degrees. For the entrants that are coming into childcare training now, there are going to be very few of them, realistically, with no Welsh at all, so what's actually being incorporated into the early years care training to make sure, at that stage, that the Welsh language skills are being developed, as opposed to an add-on later on? nicola edwards: You're quite right. Most people coming through the education system will have some awareness of Welsh although I think it's probably important to remember we do also employ people from outside of wales. It's not necessarily appropriate for then teaching that language to children, who may be coming from families who don't use Welsh at home. So, there's a lot of that in terms of child development and how you develop children bilingually, particularly if they're coming from English-medium homes, and reinforcing the language in language choices. There will also be some people who are, perhapswe see this quite a lot in the officequite confident in terms of speaking Welsh but less so in terms of some of the paperwork, the reporting, the writing and the interacting with parents more officially, which we need to think about as well. But it is mainly about getting people to a point where they can transmit that language onwards in a confident and meaningful way. lynne neagle am: Just before we move on, you said that 29 per cent of the take-up of the childcare offer is either through Welsh or is bilingual. Have you got any figures about how many children are accessing it in Welsh only? nicola edwards: We will have. With the way we do it, it's because of the way that the setting defines their language category, and that's how we collect it. We do go down to individual child level, although it's anonymised, data collection on a termly basis. lynne neagle am: Maybe if the committee could have a note, that would be really useful. lynne neagle am: We've got some questions now on childcare from Dawn Bowden. Deputy Minister, the evaluation of the childcare offer, when it was published last year, said that there was very little evidence currently available to determine what its impact was. You're going to be producing a second evaluation in November this year; do you expect to see some indications now of the impact? julie morgan am: Well, the evaluation of the first year of the childcare offer was very limited, because the childcare offer wasn't available throughout the whole of Wales. And the evaluation for year 2, I think, will also show a limited impact for the same reasons. And the parental survey was released to parents in June 2019, therefore any impact on parents in the authorities coming on board in the second year will also be negligible. So, it's from the next one, however, we hope that we will get more information. dawn bowden am: So you think, by the time we get to November 2020, you might have a better picture. What the first year's evaluation did show, however, was that 94 per cent of respondents said that they were already using formal childcare before the offer came into place. A couple of things, really: are you surprised at that, and is that likely to inform the way that you develop the offer in the future? julie morgan am: No, I'm not surprised at all. In terms of how the families found out that it was available, they found it out through the childcare providers, where they already had their children there. But, of course, we were not able to fully advertise the childcare offer until it was available in all the local authorities, which was last April. So we are planning, this autumn, quite a big push now to try to make it available to everybodyso everybody knows about it. So, no, this is the pattern we would have expected, and I think anybody who's involved in starting up something in childcare will know you have to wait a number of years before you actually see it being fully taken up. dawn bowden am: I guess the question that it raises in my mind is: does this mean that, actually, it hasn't been an incentive to get somebody back into work, because they were already in work and already had childcare provision? What you've done is you've directed money to people who were already spending that money anyway. So it hasn't been a move towards getting people into work because they couldn't afford childcare. julie morgan am: Well I think that that is something that we are moving towards, because the take-up of the offer is actually increasing each month, which is why I call it a great success. At the end of July, we hit almost 16,000 children accessing the offer, which obviously means that there are 16,000 families benefiting from this, and the feedback that we have had from parents is that they have been able to. They've got more money available, which is obvious, which is great, because obviously more money is available to plunge into the economy and carry out that sort of thing, and we've got examples of parents who've been supported into work through programmes like Parents, Childcare and Employment to begin with, and then have gone on to access the offer. So, I think we are seeing signs that people are moving on, have got more ability to be flexible in the work that they're doing, but I hope that when we look at it again, we will be able to see people actually moving into work because of having the access to childcare. Before lynne neagle am: Are you going to move on? Sin's got a supplementary. If you foresee that there's going to be more people going to be taking up that offer through the fact that you're marketing it more, what if the same situation arises that has happened on Anglesey? The take-up has been very good there, but the money that the Welsh Government has been allocating to Anglesey doesn't match that. What if it happens in every local authority right across Wales? Are you confident there's going to be plenty of money available to respond to that demand? julie morgan am: Based on the current levels of take-up and looking at the rates of increase each month, we expect to spend in the region of 50 million to 55 million in this financial year. Our published plans already include the provision of 40 million, and we're absolutely committed to making available the total funding that is needed to deliver on the offer. It is fantastic to see the offer being so well received on Ynys Mn, recognising, as Janet said earlier, it is demand led. It's this year now that the big increase has happened; the previous two years sian gwenllian am: So, local authorities won't have to find the extra money out of their own pots. You've already alluded to this in answer to Janet earlier on, about extending the childcare offer to those in training and education. So, I'm not quite sure what 'on the cusp' of returning to work is, but from the committee's point of view, we're very pleased that you've reached that conclusion, because it was one of the recommendations that we had following the scrutiny of the Bill. So, can you say a little more about that, bearing in mind that I'm also conscious that you've told Hefin you're going to be making an announcement shortly? So you may not be able to say too much. But a little bit more about the inclusion of parents in training and education, what 'on the cusp of returning to work' iswhat that means from your perspectiveand how you've arrived at that decision now, six months into the programme. What is it that's made you move towards that conclusion? julie morgan am: Well, obviously, the children and young persons committee made a very good case for education and training, in particular; I think that was one of the things that was at the top of the list. What we've committed to do is to review the programme, particularly looking at how we could bring in education and training, and that review will report early next year. But the other thing that's also happened is that, obviously, with the new First Minister, that was one of his manifesto commitmentsthat he would bring education and training in. So, we're obviously following the dawn bowden am: Because that was one of the key drivers for that as well. julie morgan am: Yes, so that is another of the key drivers, as you saidthe committee and what the First Minister said. There are a wealth of programmes supporting parents into education, training or work, and many of those do provide support with childcare costs. But we have, by rolling out this programme, the childcare programme, highlighted some gaps where people have felt that they, particularly people who are in full-time educationand I can think of a number of people who are actually doing PhD studieswho arethe letters may have come in from some of your constituentsnot able to access the offer as things stand. We're using the definition by the Office for National Statistics, aren't we, in terms of education and training. And on 'on the cusp of work', maybe that will have to be something we have to look at differentlythose people who are actually maybe undertaking very short training programmes, preparation for work, maybe actually having interviews, where they need help with childcare, that they're sort of almost there. So, they may have to be dealt with in a different way, but I think we do want to look at those. This is expanding the offer; it's not making it universal, but it's moving on. dawn bowden am: So, what are the? Overall, then, what are the factors that you're having to take into account? Is it going to be what is needed in order to encourage people back into work? Is it going to be cost? Is it going to be a combination of all of those things? What are going to be the key factors that you're going to be looking at? julie morgan am: Well, the position now is that anybody who fulfills the criteria in terms of the number of hours they work, we would look at that in terms of education and training, and then, this expression 'on the cusp of work' we may have to look at differently, because they may not fulfil those numbers in terms of number of hours training. So, we'll get a criteria, and then they will have access to the childcare offer. But I just have to emphasise that there are ways of getting help with childcare already, and we wanted to make sure we don't duplicate. That's why this field is so complex, shall we say, because there's so many different ways that you can actually get help, and we want to be sure that we don't duplicate dawn bowden am: Sorry, Julie. So, all of this is going to be incorporated in this announcement that you're going to be making shortly julie morgan am: No, this review will report early next year. My final question lynne neagle am: Before you move on, sorry, I've got a couple of supplementaries. suzy davies am: Just on the cost element, because if you do roll out this programme, obviously, on the back of evidence through a review, it is going to cost extra money. There are fairly generous Barnett consequentials coming from the comprehensive spending review and announcements on schools from the UK Government, and while I accept that you've only got annual commitments there, they're still substantial. How much money have you managed to secure for early years from the most recent announcement, and when have you planned to actually use that, maybe for some of this work? julie morgan am: Have you got some information on that? nicola edwards: The budget process is ongoing internally, so I think 'secured' is probably a slightly premature phrase. suzy davies am: Am I allowed to ask instead how much you've asked for, then? All I'm after is some reassurance that you will be getting some of this money, and as it is one of the eight priorities, certainly we would expect to see you getting a substantial amount of money for early years. julie morgan am: As one of the Government's priorities, we would expect to get any money that came as a result of any Barnett consequentials. julie morgan am: It's all in the process lynne neagle am: And the committee will want to look very carefully at that, obviously. sian gwenllian am: How much would it cost to move to a child-centred approach, which means that every child would be able to access the childcare offer, rather than doing it from parents? julie morgan am: We are looking at that. We're having a longer-term review, in terms of what it would mean if every child had access to the childcare offer. That should report early next year, and then we've got another longer-term review, looking at what a universal offer would mean. sian gwenllian am: Do we know how many children we're talking about? nicola edwards: Yes. So, there are approximately, at any given time, around 73,000 three and four-year-olds in Wales. There's some slight rounding in the numbers there, but approximately 73,000 at any given time. Based on the current eligibility criteria for the offer, it's about 34,000 children, we believe, are eligible. This does, of course, vary, depending on a whole range of different factors, and we certainly know from what we're seeing from the offer that, even where people are entitled to something, they don't necessarily take it up. And even if they do take it up, they don't necessarily take up their full entitlement, which is also something that we'd have to think about in terms of any modelling on costings. nicola edwards: It's because of the requirement that, in a two-parent household, both parents must be in work. lynne neagle am: One of the points that the committee made very strongly in our report on the Bill was that we wanted to see a much more child-centred focus, and one of the issues that came out in scrutiny was whether, actually, three and four-year-olds were the right age to be actually targeting if we're looking at things like child development. Have you given any consideration to the actual age group that's covered when we know that, for many children, it's the first 1,000 days that makes that fundamental difference? julie morgan am: We are aware that there is a case that says that two years old is a very important time. dawn bowden am: Yes, my final question, Chair, thank you, is about the parent, childcare and employment programme, which is jointly funded by the European social fund and Welsh Government. It has been quite successful, in terms of its numbers anyway, in getting economically inactive parents into work. What are the plans for this programme, if and when we leave the EU and we lose the ESF funding for that? julie morgan am: Well, the programme has recently been extended, with delivery continuing until June 2022, with additional ESF funding of 5.6 million. That's recently happened, and obviously this programme provides intensive employment to parents who are not in education, employment or training or economically inactive and where the childcare is the main barrier, and it has been a very, very successful programme. So, the UK has guaranteed funding for all EU projects approved by December 2020, and this includes the PaCE programme. I heard some other guarantees on the radio recently from the UK Treasury about guaranteeing some of these funds. But the Welsh Government can only draw on the UK Government guarantee for claims that aren't paid by the European Commission, and so the current arrangements are staying in place. To do that it would have to be part of Government planning in terms of julie morgan am: Well, we don't know what's happening with that dawn bowden am: what would happen beyond that. julie morgan am: funding, but there have been some promises from the UK Government recently, but nothing definite. sian gwenllian am: As we know, of course, the work with Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs has ended, and I know you weren't the Minister who initiated this process, but what exactly has gone wrong? What are these issues that have come to light that have made you suspend that? It's very frustrating for us, as a committee, who scrutinised that extensively and raised a lot of concerns about that. And a lot of time has been spent talking about this funding Bill, and money1 million, I understandhas been wasted, if you like, unnecessarily. So, what exactly has gone wrong? Why aren't you discussing these things with HMRC? julie morgan am:  sian gwenllian am: Yes. sian gwenllian am: Yes, but for your transparency around your particularview that it needs to be more flexible and expanded upon and, therefore, going down the HMRC route was julie morgan am: It would have restricted us a lot. So, it was a principle decision rather than any sort of technical matters to do with the Welsh language standards. But I'm really understanding more now that, really, what it's about is that you want to have a more flexible, and expand on the offer and that this would curtailgoing through HMRC would put limits on that. julie morgan am: That is one of the reasons, but there were issues about the Welsh language, which we can go into in detail, if you'd like. They would be able to process things bilingually, and I think that was probably told to the committee when we looked at the HMRC. But, in terms of the Welsh language standards that the Minister has to use, there would be some difficulties in them doing it. sian gwenllian am: But would you say that your main change came about because you wanted to be more flexible rather than any difficulties julie morgan am: One of the major reasons, I think sian gwenllian am: Okay. Those technical reasons probably do end up being quite important sian gwenllian am: But the committee was told by the previous Minister that HMRC wouldn't have any problem at all with delivering according to the Welsh language standards. julie morgan am: Do you want to add something to this? nicola edwards: So, in terms of some of the technical issues we had, if you want to start with the bilingual provision and the Welsh language standards, HMRC do provide a bilingual service at the moment for their customers in line with their Welsh language scheme, and I think we can all appreciate that schemes are quite different from the requirements of the standards. And there were some issues when we got into the detail of the standards that the Welsh Ministers are required to deliver to that caused some concerns in terms of how HMRC were going to do it, particularly in terms of the multiple IT systems that go into building up the childcare services. So, for example, there are a number of what are called 'special characters' in the Welsh alphabet, such as the to bach, for example. sian gwenllian am: Yes, well, with due respect, the to bach has always been there nicola edwards: Oh, yes, I completely agree. Unfortunately, however sian gwenllian am: and HMRC would have been able to tell you, really early on, you would have thought, that it was. I don't really want to go into it, because I think we've got to the crux of why HMRC was dropped. I think it's been dropped because Julie feels that the offer needs to be more flexible, and I can understand why you would say that. julie morgan am: If we bring in training and education, for example, we wouldn't be able to do that via the HMRC, it would have to be done by the local authorities. Any people of immigration status of no resource from public funds, that would have to be done via the local authorities. , there are other things with using HMRCif any changes were made with the English offer, for example, because this would be delivered via HMRC with the English offer, that would cause difficulties for the Welsh offer. jo-anne daniels: The only thing I'd add is thatand, again, I think the Minister has referred to thisthe costs that HMRC presented us with at the end of the discovery phase were significantly higher than the costs that had initially been outlined and that we outlined to the committee in the regulatory impact assessment. So, our conclusion is that we can deliver a cheaper system and a system that has the flexibility that the Deputy Minister has referred to by working with local authorities rather than HMRC. So, there is an important issue around value for money as well and making sure that the investment that we're making into developing the national system is one thatthat, in a sense, that investment stays in Wales. So, obviously, the money that we're paying over to HMRC to run the system would be supporting HMRC and their employees wherever they may be based, many of them not based in Wales; investment in local authorities to administer the system means that we're retaining more of that investment here. sian gwenllian am: Well, I congratulate you on persuading local government and WLGA to change their minds, because they actually told this committee that they favoured the HMRC optionand this is only going back a few monthsbecause it will removeand this is quoting them 'it will remove the administrative burden of receiving applications and checking eligibility from local authorities' blah, blah, blah, blah.So, they've obviously changed their minds as well, which is, you know. I congratulate you on that, but it does present us as a committee with a little bit of a problem, really, because, if we're told one thing a few months ago and then we're told something completely different today, you know, evidencewe have to go on evidence that we've heard, and the evidence has changed now. julie morgan am: I think, during the period since it was discussed on the committee, the work with the HMRC has helped highlight to us where we needed to go. So, I think we did learn a lot and it certainly has helped show to us where we think is the best place to go. I would like to pay tribute to the local authorities, because they've been great partners in this and they're very positive about moving forward keeping the work. And there's also a feeling that, because they are so much closer to the local public than HMRC is, they're able to build up links with families and help with some of these difficult issues. Because I'm sure many of you may have had individual casesI certainly havewhere there's been quite a lot of complexity about helping people fill in the forms and look at their eligibility. And thanks to the HMRC, because we've had nothing but a very positive relationship with them. How much is it actually going to cost to change this system from being a temporary arrangement with local authorities to a permanent one? And how much more is it going to cost for the more flexible system that you have in mind? They're not going to do this for nothing. How much extra are you giving them, and will they use it for this? How are you ensuring it's used for this? jo-anne daniels: So, at the moment, local. jo-anne daniels: So, part of the reason for using 10 is to try to ensure that we build economies of scale and that we have a more efficient operation.Those authorities that undertake that function are given a specific grant in order to do that. suzy davies am: Could you give us an idea of the price tag? jo-anne daniels: At the moment, it's about 2.5 million. jo-anne daniels: So that, as I said, is a ring-fenced sum that they use to administer the offer. We are now starting the detailed work to define the new system requirements so that we will have a single application process across Wales, moving forward. As part of that work, we'll need to consider the detailed costings, but our initial estimate suggests that it would be less than the cost proposed by HMRC. suzy davies am: Okay, when those costings are worked up, perhaps we could have a note comparing the two figures. sian gwenllian am: If it became a universal offer, would those costs reduce? Would there be so much bureaucracy involved in checking eligibility and stuff if every child was open to the offer? jo-anne daniels: So, clearly, if every child is eligible, then a large part of the process falls away in terms of the need to verify income and so on. For example, with the foundation phase, which is universally available, there is an application process and there is an administrative function that sits alongside that. At this point in time, I couldn't give you any indication of sian gwenllian am: But it would be substantially less, wouldn't it, because they wouldn't have to do all these eligibility checks and all those things? nicola edwards: They wouldn't have to do the eligibility checks, but they would still have to make payments to the childcare providers and make sure they were paying for the right number of hours in respect of each child. So, parents would still need to tell them where their child was going, and there would still need to be some work alongside that. Sin, do you want to ask about the Welsh language? sian gwenllian am: I think we've. lynne neagle am: Really? sian gwenllian am: I don't think that that was the real reason why the change happened. lynne neagle am: Nevertheless, the committee was given very concrete assurances that the Welsh language side of this was going to be covered off. Have you got anything that you want to add on that? Obviously, for us as a committee, we believe what we're told when we are given assurances. So, that's quite concerning for us, really, that that suddenly then became an issue, when both HMRC and the Minister at the time told us that this wasn't going to be a problem. There's a difference between a bilingual service in the context of what HMRC understood that to be, in the context of their scheme, and the very detail of the standards when they got into their IT systems. lynne neagle am: Shouldn't that have been something that was worked out at the beginning? nicola edwards: Possibly, but they did need to do quite detailed work, not just into their own IT systems, but the feed-in systems from the Home Office, the Department for Work and Pensions and the Post Office as well, to understand the full complexity of how the standards would comply across all of that. It was just some of the specific details of the requirements placed on the Welsh Ministers, because it is the Welsh Ministers' standards that they would need to deliver against that they were struggling with. lynne neagle am: I think that the committee would feel that that should have been bottomed out at the beginning, really. lynne neagle am: Okay, just before we move on to Flying Start, can I just ask: the Minister mentioned a longer term review of the childcare offer. Are you able to give us any indication of when that will report, please? julie morgan am: Would we have any idea? nicola edwards: We haven't set out a definitive timescale on that as of yet because we've been focusing very much on getting the review in terms of training, education and on the cusp of returning to work up and running. Can I just begin by asking you how you respond to the assertion that children from the most disadvantaged backgrounds do better in a mixed socioeconomic environment than in a targeted environment? julie morgan am: I think that's what Flying Start does, isn't it? Yes, I would have thought that was likely. suzy davies am: Well, the reason I'm asking you that, of course, is because this committee has suggested, perhaps, changes to the outreach system to target more disadvantaged children, and not necessarily capture people who happen to be in a geographic area. julie morgan am: So, you're saying that you feel that a universal offer in certain areas is not advantageous to suzy davies am: Well, I'm asking you, really. If it's the case that we're only going after disadvantaged children, which would take very precise targeting julie morgan am: I'm not only going after disadvantaged children. The reason we've targeted Flying Start is because it would be great if we had enough money to have Flying Start throughout the whole of Wales, but we just don't have that sort of money. Because just in response to this committee's 2018 report, you did say that: 'defined geographical targeting of Flying Start support will be considered as part of the Welsh Governments work on the Early Years system.' That suggests you still have geographic targeting in mind. So, if you're looking at a very mixed source of economic experience for children, what are the geographic boundaries you're considering? julie morgan am: At the moment, Flying Start can go beyond the geographical boundaries, with the extension suzy davies am: With limits, yes. I think they can use 10 per cent of their income to go beyond the geographical boundaries, and many of them have done that. But, obviously, there are four elements to Flying Start, and only those geographical areas have got the four elements, but there could be the opportunity of extending some of that beyond the Flying Start geographical areas. suzy davies am: I accept what you say about the current system julie morgan am: I believe it's much more. But, obviously, there are huge cost implications for thatunless you're giving us some insight into what you're going to say next week, I don't know. But actually, defining anything geographically, which now seems to be fairly arbitrary, because it's not targeted purely at disadvantaged childrenon what basis are we choosing the geographic areas we are choosing at the moment? julie morgan am: Well, they're chosen then because of the benefit take-up in those particular areas. So, it's reaching some of the poorest children, but not all of the poorest children, but it's reaching the poorest children in a way that is not stigmatising, and where the services are open to everybody, and I think that's very important. Well, having established that, we have fairly recent research here that a third of children living in poverty in Wales are already falling behind at the age of fivethat suggests that two thirds of them aren't, but it's still a very worrying statistic. Not all children live in Flying Start areas; how are you going to reach that third who, even at such an early age, are already falling behind? How many of them are in Flying Start areas? julie morgan am: I think the actual number of children in poverty, the most disadvantaged that we reach through the Flying Start areasI think it's about 46 per cent. Is that? Do you know the actual percentage? suzy davies am: It's about a quarter of total children are in there, but jo-anne daniels: So, just to give you a few of the numbers, there are just over 36,000 children benefiting from Flying Start services. And because of the nature of the benefit take-up data, and because we don't assess eligibility within a Flying Start area, we can't be absolutely certain how many children within a Flying Start area are actually in poverty. So, it's an estimate, and it's a range, and the range is that around 45 per cent of children in Flying Start areas would be in poverty.FootnoteLink suzy davies am: Well, that's interesting. I would have expected it to be much higher than that, particularly if the geographic areas had been targeted on benefit claims, effectively. Are you disappointed that the proportion isbasically, 55 per cent of those children aren't living in poverty. That's what you're saying, isn't it? jo-anne daniels: Well, I'd offer two observations. One: the nature of poverty in Wales is actually, generally, more dispersed than perhaps sometimes is appreciated. Yes, we have very concentrated areas of suzy davies am: Well, actually, we do appreciate it, which is why we're asking this question. Sorry, I've lost my train of thought now, in terms of the secondoh, sorry: whether you're in or out of poverty is, in one sense, very black/white. But in reality of coursein terms of the income definition, it's very black/white. But, of course, there will be a large number of people who are just above, but also families who move in and out, so it's quite a transient population in some senses, in terms of people having incomes that aren't stable, people having jobs that go with that that aren't stable. So, at any one point in time, you're only sort of capturing a snapshot of what's happening. I mentioned a third of children living in poverty had fallen behind at five; by the age of 14, half that number is still falling behind, so something has happened between that third and that half to improve the life chances of those individual children or young people. Is that attributable to Flying Start? Can you say that candidly? Or is it a happy coincidence, where there could be some causation, but we cant prove it? jo-anne daniels: We certainly think that Flying Start is making a positive impact, both on the point at which children go to school, and then subsequently. And I think as the committee knows, weve been working with the SAILsecure anonymised information linkageand the databank there to look at how we can do longitudinal studies to track childrens progress, to look at the extent to which outcomes are effected by Flying Start interventions. suzy davies am: We probably don't have time for this level of detail today, but half of those children are still behind at the age of 14. So, I'd be curious to know if there's any immediate plans to help them catch up or make sure that their successors don't fall into the same position, the same trap. Have you got anything high level that you can mention at this stage? julie morgan am: Just in terms of what were thinking of doing with Flying Start. The key thing about Flying Start is the collaborative way that it works with the health visitors and all the speech and language therapists and childcare, and were looking at ways of trying to get some of those elements to reach a wider group. And as I said, we talked about earlier the eight earlier years transformation pathfinders that we talked about in the local authoritieswe talked about that earlierso, thats where were going to look at Flying Start and how we can try to make it more accessible to more children. We do want to make it available to more children, and thats what were looking at. And you'll have to wait to see what we come up with suzy davies am: No, nowe'll ask you more about that in due course. Actually, that job would be an awful lot easier if you knew how many children within Flying Start areas were taking up all four elements. Why don't you know that? Why is that data not collected? julie morgan am: Do we know why? jo-anne daniels: So, the approach that weve taken to evaluation in Flying Start. The committee will have seen the various evaluation reports that have been published, and I know that youre familiar with the work that, as I say, weve been doing with SAIL. Were currently focusing on individual data collection, and through that we want to be able to report on levels of engagement, but also outcomes for children. We hope to be able to extend that, and we hope to be able to provide more evidence about the interventions and the impact that they then achieve. Because, to be honest, I would want to know if a childs chances have improved primarily because theyre getting good-quality childcare or primarily because their parents are taking up parenting courses. Theres got to be some indication somewhere in here about which of these four elements is making the greatest difference. It will always be quite difficult to definitively provide answers to that, because many parents will be taking these things up in combination. So, disentangling which has had the effect is, obviously, quite trickyin particular, all parents will be getting the enhanced health visiting. Not every parent will take up parenting support, not every child will need speech and language help, so suzy davies am: And that's why we need to know who is. jo-anne daniels: Disentangling what's helped and what hasn't I think will always be quite a difficult thing to do. Just on the final point from meyes, 88 per cent of Flying Start's childcare offers were taken up, but we've had some local authorities where the take-up has dropped dramatically. I think Denbighshire was down a fair bit, wasn't it, and Ceredigion, I think, had had a poor take-up. Have you got any indication why? I'm thinking of Denbighshire particularly, where there is a traditiontaking up third-party childcare is cultural there, whereas in Ceredigion,for example, there are far fewer places available in the first place and less of a tradition of children taking up childcare. But what's happened in Denbighshire? julie morgan am: I think there are a number of different reasons why parents do decide not to use a facility, and, obviously, that always exists, but each local authority has a Flying Start account manager in place to support them in the delivery of the programme and the account management activities, and there are formal account meetings that look at this sort of thing once a year suzy davies am: So, what have they told you? julie morgan am: and these meetings will take place in November 2019. That's when the specific delivery issues will be discussed in depth, so that's when we'll find out what has happened and why there may have been a drop. suzy davies am: Can I just ask about the timing of that? Because if you already know that there's a 6 per cent drop, why will it take the best part of a year towell, November's only next month, to be fair, now, but why will it take that length of time to establish why there's a drop? You'd have thought if you'd seen a trend like that julie morgan am: Obviously, they meet at certain times and they will assess what's happened. suzy davies am: Okay, but we'll get a note on that, is it? It's just that they knew this six months ago. julie morgan am: In November, we'll have more information about this, so we can let you have information about that. And then finally from me, Chair, if I may, Flying Start beneficiariesit's got a specific explanation of what a Flying Start beneficiary is, but I think, particularly in view of the evidence we've heard on this committee about parental support in connection with the removal of the defence of reasonable chastisement, for example, this committee is very concerned about what's out there in terms of parental support. Eighteen per cent of Flying Start beneficiaries have parents attending the informal parenting courses; that's 18 per cent, that's not very high. Any idea about what you might be able to do to encourage take-up or is that very locally decided? lynne neagle am: If I can add to that, obviously, somebody only has to attend one coursewe've got no way of knowing whether parents are completing the whole of a course, really. julie morgan am: Obviously, the offer is there for parents to take up the parenting courses, and there are four elements to Flying Start, and maybe some of the parents don't feel that they want to or need to. I don't think we've got any more evidence on that for take-up suzy davies am: Well, the reach of this is going to be important, because we need the reassurance on the back of the legislation that is going through at the moment. jo-anne daniels: Parenting courses are, of course, one aspect of parenting support, but not the only one, and they'll be appropriate for a lot of parents, but for some not. What all parents do get at an enhanced level in Flying Start is the support of the health visitor, so the health visitor is, in effect, providing a significant amount of support for parenting. Now, that can be practical things like weaning or potty training et cetera, but, actually, it's also about managing a child's behaviour, managing how a parent develops that bonding and that attachment with their child. So, the role of the health visitor in supporting a parent to be a parent is absolutely critical, and every parent in Flying Start areas will be getting that enhanced level of support. Of course, it's not just in Flying Start areas now, because with the Healthy Child Wales programme, the universal programme of health visiting visits, we have a much more consistent and standardised set of visits and engagements with parents that cover a lot of these areas. In addition, I'd also add that when parents use the childcare in Flying Start, or childcare generally outside of Flying Start areas, there is often a lot of working between the childcare setting and the parent over parentingagain, managing a child's behaviour, managing any issues that the childcare worker thinks are emerging in terms of whether it's eating or, again, toileting. So, parenting courses are important, but it's really essential that we see those in the broader context of the different ways in which lots of professionals interact with parents, providing them with advice, guidance and support, and actually what works for parents in terms of how they take on board some of that advice and that help. Sometimes a formal course is quite off-putting for parents, but the sort of quiet word, the top tips, the advice that a friendly professional gives can be very, very impactful. It does raise, unfortunately, another question about whether a health visitor in those circumstances might find themselves in a difficult position if they're dealing with a parent who has smacked a child, but we'll leave that for Stage 3. Well, can I thank the Minister and the officials for attending this morning? As usual, you'll be sent a transcript to check for accuracy following the meeting, but thank you again for your attendance. There's just one today: the letter from the WLGA regarding the Childcare Funding (Wales) Act 2019 in response to our letter asking about the change in approach. Can I propose, in accordance with Standing Order 17.42, that the committee resolves to meet in private for the remainder of the meeting? Are Members content? Thank you.
Item 2 this morning is the Children (Abolition of Defence of Reasonable Punishment) (Wales) Bill: Stage 2 proceedings. I'm pleased to welcome Julie Morgan AM, Deputy Minister for Health and Social Services; Karen Cornish, deputy director, children and families division at Welsh Government; and Emma Gammon, lawyer for Welsh Government. As I said, the purpose of the meeting is to undertake Stage 2 proceedings on the Children (Abolition of Defence of Reasonable Punishment) (Wales) Bill. For these proceedings, Members should have copies of the marshalled list of amendments, the groupings of the amendments for debate and the voting order for the amendments. The marshalled list of amendments is the list of all amendments tabled, marshalled into the order in which the sections appear in the Bill. The order in which we consider amendments will be the default orderthat is, sections 1 to 3 and the long title. However, the order in which they're called and moved for decision is dictated by the marshalled list. Members will, therefore, need to follow the two papers, although I will advise Members when I call them whether they're being called to speak in the debate or to move their amendments for a decision. For the record, in accordance with the convention agreed by the Business Committee, as Chair I will move amendments in the name of the Deputy Minister. For expediency, I will assume that the Deputy Minister wishes me to move all of her amendments, and I will do so at the appropriate place in the marshalled list. Deputy Minister, if you do not want a particular amendment to be moved, please indicate to me at the relevant point in proceedings. In line with our usual practice, legal advisers to the committee and the Deputy Minister are not expected to provide advice on the record. If Members wish to seek legal advice during proceedings, please do so by passing a note to the legal adviser and, if necessary, we can adjourn. So, we will proceed, then, to group 1, which is the duty to promote public awareness. I move amendment 1 in the Deputy Minister's name and call on the Deputy Minister to speak to her amendment and the other amendments in this group. My amendments 1 and 4 will place a duty on Welsh Ministers to provide information and increase awareness about the change in the law to ensure that the public are made aware of how the law will change as a result of the defence of reasonable punishment being abolished and that physical punishment would be prohibited once the Act commences. I tabled these amendments in response to this committee's recommendationthis was a recommendation from this committee in the Stage 1 report, so I have responded to that. I've already made a commitment to a high-intensity awareness-raising campaign over approximately six years from Royal Assent, should the Bill be passed. I've considered amendments 1A to 1E, which have been tabled by Janet Finch-Saunders, and which relate to the duty to raise awareness. We don't think, actually, that this adds anything to the Government amendment, which already mentions awareness. I understand, of course, that the awareness-raising campaign needs to be comprehensive, well planned and to reach out to all those people and all those communities who need to be aware of the law change, and understand how to respond to it. But I don't think it's helpful or necessary to highlight specific groups, such as visitors to Wales, on the face of the Billthat's the approach taken in amendment 1Eas it risks placing too much emphasis on certain groups at the expense of others. In relation to children, the committee will know that I'm fully committed to childrens rights, and that Welsh Ministers are already under a duty to have due regard to the rights of children whenever they exercise their functions. An additional due regard requirement, such as the one set out in amendment 1D, relating specifically to the need to promote awareness among children is not needed. This would be part and parcel of the Welsh Government approach to putting childrens rights at the heart of our policy making. Similarly, I don't think it's necessary for the Bill to set out specifically the topics that need to be covered in the awareness-raising campaign, as is suggested in amendments 1B and 1C. Information required about parenting support will be considered by the parenting expert group, under the auspices of the Bills strategic implementation group, working with my officials and the expert stakeholder group on the awareness-raising campaign. And, really, their thinking should not be constrained in any way by specifications on the face of the Bill. I think we always need to bear in mind that what the Bill does is remove a defence to an existing criminal offence; it does not create a new offence. And in this context, it doesn't make sense for this Bill to contain a provision requiring the provision of information about how a person may raise concerns if it appears to them that a child is being physically punished. As I set out in my letter to this committee responding to recommendation 15 on this point, safeguarding is everyones business, and, as now, the public have a role in highlighting to relevant services if they are concerned about a child. I'm asking for the support of Members for amendments 1 and 4, and I ask Members to reject amendments 1A to 1E because this would place unnecessary provisions on the face of the Bill. I wish to speak to amendments 1A to 1E, which relate to the Deputy Minister's amendment on the duty to promote public awareness. While we believe it is absolutely imperative that the public are made aware of this controversial change in the law, the Deputy Minister's amendment lacks a number of key points that the committee were actually keen to address at Stage 1. An important thread runs throughout each and every amendment that I've tabled within this groupthat of a sustained awareness campaign, which not only stretches beyond the implementation of the Bill, but serves as a duty for future administrations. Amendment 1A: primarily, amendment 1A changes amendment 1 to include the promotion of understanding changes to the law. I don't think it's enough for the Welsh Government to say that the public should be made aware of the coming into force of section 1 and that a public awareness campaign needs to be sustained until the Welsh Government's objectives have been achieved. Despite the fact that it is intended to change behaviour, the consequences of this law are far greater than that of organ donation or prohibiting smoking indoors. Instead of an opt-out system or a civil offence, this law will remove a defence for parents, information on which could be there on their records for the rest of their lives, potentially separate parents, and could affect employment chances. As such, whilst we agree with the necessity of the awareness campaign, it is important too that the Welsh Government take stock and ensures that parents are not penalised due to a weak awareness campaign. The witnesses we heard before this committee also noted the necessity of ensuring that the public understands lynne neagle am: Janet, Dawn is asking if you'll take an intervention. dawn bowden am: I just wanted to knowcould you give us examples of any other piece of legislation where there's been indefinite public awareness campaigns once it's been passed? janet finch-saunders am: There's a lot of legislation. The first Assembly term when I was here dawn bowden am: Yes, what I'm asking janet finch-saunders am: I'm trying to respond dawn bowden am: What I'm asking for is: can you give us specific examples of where there have been indefinite public awareness campaigns running indefinitely past the enactment of a piece of legislation? janet finch-saunders am: The very first term that I was an Assembly Member, we passed 25 pieces of separate legislation. Even today, as I sit here, the public are not aware of many of those pieces of legislation. So, therefore, I think there is a necessity for both children and parents to become involved, and I shall speak now dawn bowden am: With respect, Chair, that's not the question I asked. lynne neagle am: I can call you in the debate, if you'd like to make a more substantive contribution on this. janet finch-saunders am: The witnesses who we heard from before this committee also noted the necessity of ensuring that the public understands the implications. And that's what we're talking about here, Membersthe implications of removing this defence. Strikingly, the Office of Police and Crime Commissioner for Gwent stated the following: 'the potential for public resistance to the Bill through misunderstanding or confusion over it implications may pose the largest barrier to its implementation.' If you are intent on removing the defence of reasonable punishment, it is therefore not unreasonable to ensure that law-abiding parents fully understand the ramifications of this Bill. Additionally, the committee found that while the current Welsh Government's intention to deliver a public awareness campaign was beyond doubt, future Governments may have less of a commitment. This places further weight on the fact that the Welsh Government should be under a duty to promote awareness and understanding of the Bill beyond its commencement. Furthermore, the Children (Equal Protection from Assault) (Scotland) Bill quite clearly notes that, under section 2, the Scottish Ministers must take such steps as they consider appropriate to promote public awareness and understanding about the effect of section 1 on the abolition for the defence of reasonable punishment. Therefore, I would be grateful if the Deputy Minister can respond as to the reasons why the Welsh Government has deviated from this course of action in their amendment. [Interruption.] Should our amendment be agreed lynne neagle am: Are you taking an intervention? janet finch-saunders am: No. janet finch-saunders am: Should our amendment to be agreed, we also request that a printing change be made to ensure that the new heading reflects promoting awareness of the changes to the law made by section 1. Amendment 1B: amendment 1B is in line with the committee's recommendation 9, which stated that, as part of a public awareness campaign, there should be details about the support available to parents to use alternatives to physical punishment when disciplining their children. During evidence at Stage 1, the witnesses we saw before the committee raised serious concerns about harder-to-reach groups who needed to be made aware of removing the defence. For example, Children in Wales, Action for Children and Play Wales stated that some families and communities may be harder to reach with information and support. Now, while the Deputy Minister states that she would work hard to ensure that harder-to-reach groups receive this information, a duty to provide information on alternatives to physical punishment would ensure that future Welsh Governments would maintain a successful awareness-raising campaign. I note the Deputy Minister accepted the recommendation, through our amendment, but this does not explicitly include a duty to provide details about support for parents. As will be expanded upon later, the Deputy Minister has relied upon the 'Parenting: Give it Time' campaign to be delivered alongside awareness raising. However, this is only an online resource and she must be clear about what other avenues will be available to parents who do not have access to the internet or are part of harder-to-reach groups. Amendment 1C: amendment 1C supports the committee's recommendation 15 that explains that the Welsh Government should ensure clear advice is provided on what people can do if they have seen or learned of a child being physically assaulted. We urged, at Stage 1, that although many professionals were already under a duty to report concerns about physical punishment, regardless of the Bill, other witnesses raised concerns that it could create the potential for claims of abuse that are unfounded. In particular, some were worried that children, who may not realise the implications of reporting, could make allegations that are actually untrue. While we would expect the awareness-raising campaign to include the consequences of false accusations, this could also be reflected among adults, if the public are not sufficiently made aware of how they can report and in what situations they can report a case of assault. I think it's worth just pointing out at this stage that the majority of the amendments that are being made and articulated by Janet there are based on committee recommendations, and those recommendations were made after taking evidence from the public at large, but also you as well. So, that suggests that, at that stage, we weren't reassured by the offer that you were making because we felt the need to put these recommendations into our report. Now, I recognise that you've moved some way on some of these amendments, and we'll been talking about that through the course of the debates on other groups. But the one thing to bear in mind here is this is legislation, nowthat means that this is the instrument of the Assembly, not of Government, and if this Assembly feels that the face of the Bill is unclear on the minimum requirements of a public awareness campaign, then we have the right to suggest the things that we would like to see in that public awareness-raising campaign. The reason these have been tabled individually and independently is that some may be acceptable where others may not be, so it will be disappointing to hear that you're rejecting them all, and the reason they need to go on the face of the Bill is that, if you are going to introduce specifics via regulation, at the moment we have no reassurance about how you're going to do thatabout what input the Assembly, on behalf of our constituents, could have in designing that public awareness-raising campaign. Unless you accept some amendments in other groups, that is the position with this Bill: the influence of the Assembly will be zero over the content of an awareness-raising campaign. In terms of it being non-time limited, I think the amendment has been tabled in the way it has not to oblige you to an everlasting, never-ending campaign of awareness raising. But if you bear in mind that, seven years after the introduction of this Bill, there's going to be some reporting on the effectiveness of the Bill, what is the point of doing that if you don't then have an obligation, should the reports require it to be necessary, to continue promoting the changes in the law? I accept that that can't go on for centuries, but to actually limit it to two years on an issue that is so sensitive, and which has a reach beyond our boundaries, I think is genuinely a mistake. I think that's true, but I think Janet Finch-Saunders was right to say that members of the public, ordinary individuals, not professionals, will need assurance that they're doing the right thing. The amendment as listed is not even there to encourage people to do that, although that can be read in that way, but it is to help them be certain that they are doing the right thing. If this is going to be up to the individual, as you've said, and the committee itself wasn't reassured that individuals would know what to do, perhaps I can ask you to consider at Stage 3, if you're going to reject this amendment, how you can reassure members of the public that, if they are going to intervene on the back of this law, they're making things better, not worse. dawn bowden am: My comments, really, relate to ongoing awareness-raising campaigns, which I think all of us would want to see, and would appreciate in any changes in legislation. My point, really, is that we have a plethora of legislation that this Assembly has passed in the last 20 years, and I'm not aware of any legislation where, on the face of the Bill we have ongoing awareness-raising campaigns on an indefinite basis. It seems to me that, for some reason, you seem to be wanting to take a completely different approach to this piece of legislation. From what the Deputy Minister is sayingand perhaps I will get some clarity on thisthere will be an amendment to the legislation that will say that we have an awareness campaign. That awareness campaign can be the subject of consultation with interested parties in terms of what needs to be included in it. It could also, I assume, Deputy Minister, be an awareness campaign that can be written into a set of guidance for future use. But the point I'm trying to make is that I don't believe that any piece of legislation requires ongoing and indefinite awareness-raising campaigns, and particularly in relation to visitors to Wales. Again, we have other pieces of legislation in Wales that are not applicable in the other parts of the UK. I am not aware that there is a necessity for awareness-raising campaigns with visitors coming into Wales on the raft of the other pieces of legislation that we have that they don't. And similarly, when we go to visit countries that have different legislation, we don't necessarily know what legislation we're going into when we visit that countryyou just go there and you accept that you go to a different country and you abide by their laws. So, my key point, Chair, is just the necessity of an ongoing, endless awareness campaign being written onto the face of the Bill. hefin david am: My comments follow logically from Dawn Bowden's comments, particularly in relation to amendments 1D and 1E. What you would be doing is that this Senedd, if this was on the face of the Bill, the duty on Ministers, would be putting the duty on Ministers in law beyond the life of the fifth Senedd, into the next Senedd term, and putting that duty on those newly elected Ministers after that, which, in principle, would be against the principles of binding lynne neagle am: Hefin, are you taking an intervention from Suzy? hefin david am: Yes, happy to. hefin david am: I'm happy to take it now, because I was going to sum up by agreeing with the point you made, actually. You referred to this potentially binding Ministers in future Assemblies; at the moment, we've got an implementation period and a five-year reporting period that takes any reporting on this Act into the Assembly after next. I'm wondering if you're going to have any comments on that when we come to the amendment to change that later on. hefin david am: Well, when we get to that amendment, I'll make comments if I feel it necessary. But at this point in time, we're talking about amendments 1D and 1E, and particularly in relation to 1D and 1E it just isn't necessary, given the fact thatI won't call it a concession, because I think you made a reasonable point about the Minister making a statement at Stage 3, and I think Dawn Bowden actually supported that as well. And that's my key point, really, which is why I wouldn't vote for those two amendments. I don't believe that there is a need for an indefinite campaign, as is outlined in 1A. I agree entirely that there is a need for a campaign during the period of change, and therefore I'm very glad to see that the Government has brought forward amendment 1, and I do hope that there will be a real push during the period of change. In terms of amendment 1B, I do have sympathy with what is being said here, but I believe that any kind of information or campaign in terms of enabling parents to learn about alternatives to physical punishment should be the subject of continual far-reaching work by the Government, through various programmes, and it should not be an addition on the face of this Bill, which deals with a small change to the common law. And then, on 1D also, if I mayI don't agree with this either. Again, I believe that there is a need to promote awareness amongst children, but that should happen through the children's rights convention, as part of a broader programme to promote children's rights. julie morgan am: Thank you all very much for your contributions to the debate and your comments on these amendments today. I just want to re-emphasise that it is as a result of the recommendation from this committee that we are putting this duty to have the awareness campaign on the face of the Bill,and I absolutely recognise the crucial role awareness raising has to play in supporting the implementation of the Bill. I'm very grateful for and appreciate the committee's interest and the work that you've done in this area of work. We're committed to a high-intensity awareness over six years from Royal Assent, and there is an expert stakeholder group supporting us with the development of the awareness campaign. Would you just take an intervention on that just to help me understand? A two-year awareness-raising campaignhow have you concluded that julie morgan am: Six-year. suzy davies am: Oh, so it is going to continue beyond section 1 coming into force julie morgan am: Yes. Amendment 1B, about support available to parents and how to access itagain, this level of detail is not required on the face of the Bill. I just want to emphasise we have got this expert implementation group, who are working on all aspects of this Bill, many of whom represent organisations who gave evidence to this committee. I think lots of these amendments are very helpful and interesting, but would be discussed and would be acted on in the normal pathway of planning and development, and they're not required on the face of the Bill. So, I'm not putting them down, I'm just saying that we don't need them to be there on the face of the Bill. And then amendment 1Cthe information about how to raise concernsI do repeat that safeguarding is everybody's business, and the same issues apply now as will after this defence has been removed. Amendment 1DMinisters to have regard to the need to promote awareness among childrennow, children's rights are absolutely enshrined in our policy making, and the entire Bill is about protecting the rights of children. Again, in terms of visitors, the level of detail is simply not required on the face of the Bill. And then to pick up a few of the other points that were raised, revisions to the impact assessments are being considered as part of my commitment to update the explanatory memorandum ahead of Stage 3. The issue that was raised about the Scottish Bill, that it refers to 'understanding'now, the Scottish Bill was not a Government Bill, it was a private Member's Bill, and our view is that nothing is added by adding the 'understanding'; 'awareness' is sufficient. So, basically, I think that the points made have been very useful, but I urge committee members to accept my amendments, but to reject those proposed by Janet Finch-Saunders, as they are unnecessary provisions in terms of what the awareness-raising duty needs to achieve. Does anyMember object? [Objection.]Okay, I'll take a vote by show of hands.All those in favour of amendment 1B.All those against. Does any Member object? [Objection.] Okay, as there's an objection, I'll take a vote. Deputy Minister, do you wish to proceed to a vote on amendment 1? julie morgan am: I do. Does any Member object? [Objection.] Okay, we have an objection, so we'll take a vote by show of hands. We'll move on now then to group 2, which relates to the duty to report on the effect of the legislation. I move amendment 2 in the Deputy Minister's name, and call on the Deputy Minister to speak to her amendments, and the other amendments in this group. The amendments in this group are to do with the post-implementation review of the Bill, and I believe there was also a committee recommendation to this end from your committee, so you strongly influenced this amendment. It's clear from Members' contributions to this group and recommendations by the committee at Stage 1 that they share my commitment to the importance of post-implementation review of the effect of the abolition of the defence of reasonable punishment. I've already provided assurance that I agree with the importance placed on such a review, both in the explanatory memorandum and during Stage 1 scrutiny. I also made a commitment to bring forward a Government amendment to put a duty to undertake a post-implementation review on the face of the Bill. As I said in my responses to the Stage 1 committee report, and as set out in the explanatory memorandum, the post-implementation review of this Bill will not be a single piece of work, but a continuous programme of work during the years following the commencement of section 1. Firstly, we will continue to conduct attitudinal surveys, which will be used to track changes in attitude towards the physical punishment of children and prevalence of parents reporting that they use physical punishment. Secondly, through a dedicated task and finish group, we are working with organisations to put in place arrangements to establish robust methods for capturing meaningful data relating to the Bill and to consider the possible impact on services. Turning to amendment 2C, this amendment would require Welsh Ministers to prepare and lay before the Assembly a report on the effect of their promotion of public awareness before section 1 is commenced. This amendment is unnecessary and is in conflict with what I think is a priority for the implementation of this Bill: that is, given certainty on the commencement date and in enabling us to work towards this with our partners and stakeholders. I also think this amendment is not required because, as I've already stated, we are preparing to assess the effectiveness of our awareness raising. In June, I shared the findings of a representative survey, which establishes a baseline on public awareness and opinion towards physical punishment of children and the proposed legislation. I speak to amendments 2C, excluding 2D, to 2K, which relate to the Deputy Minister's amendment 2 on preparing a published report on the effect of abolishing the defence of reasonable punishment. Again, I must stress the importance of getting this right due to the controversial and long-lasting effects of removing the defence of reasonable punishment. Amendments 2E to 2K outline what we would expect to be within this report, and we would wish to see a commitment from the Deputy Minister to ensure the National Assembly for Wales is fully apprised and able to scrutinise the result of this report. Amendment 2C requests that the Welsh Government prepare a report on the awareness-raising campaign and lays it before the Assembly before section 1 commences. As I have outlined under my amendments in group 1, the understanding of the public about the implications of the Bill cannot be sidelined. Although the Deputy Minister has repeated her commitment to a public awareness campaign, we, as the National Assembly for Wales, must be able to scrutinise its effectiveness before section 1 begins. As I noted under amendments 1B to 1E, there are specific groups of people who need to be evaluated on their understanding of the Bill's effect. I'm sure that the Deputy Minister will agree that the harder-to-reach groups are undoubtedly the most vulnerable to any negative impacts that the Bill will have because of the greater potential of a lack of awareness. It is, therefore, important for the Assembly to be able to determine whether the awareness-raising campaign has had a positive effect on these groups of people. As will also be elaborated under amendment 2D, it is extremely important that we, as the Parliament of Wales, are fully apprised of the awareness-raising campaign's impact. Before we implement what will be a criminal offence, it is vital that we ensure that those affected are not adversely impacted because of a poorly targeted awareness campaign. Therefore, I would be grateful if the Deputy Minister would commit to an independent evaluation of the awareness campaign's effects before section 1 commences. Deputy Minister, first of all, can I just say thank you for your opening remarks about the possibility of perhaps doing some work around amendment 2B? I'll come to that a little bit later, if I may. I just want to begin by commenting briefly on what you said about why you'll be rejecting amendment 2C here. I actually don't think that this amendment should affect or jeopardise the commencement date in any way at all. It's an operational requirement to get this work done before the commencement date that's in the draft Bill at the moment. So, failing to meet that would be as a result of operations not going well, rather than anything intrinsic in the Bill, so I'm not sure I can accept your argument on that. And, on 2Dvery pleased to hear that you'd be willing to introduce something about 'laying' rather than 'publishing' at Stage 3, but, in the spirit of recognising that this is the legislature, perhaps I could encourage you just to accept the amendment at this stage, because it doesn't make any difference. Your amendment is going to pass, and this amendment to it would beI think the gesture there would be very much appreciated. I'll be speaking mainly to amendments 2A and 2B, but I want to begin, again, by thanking you for moving some way on this and considering amendments to the Bill on the issue of reporting, because I know you were keen to avoid amendments in the name of simplicity; you mentioned it earlier. But this is not a newid bychan, I'm afraid, Sin; the terms and the effect of this Bill are quite extensive, and it does need the reassurances, if you like, necessary to mitigate potentially disproportionate effects of this Bill on families where parents' actions had been lawful up until this point in statute. I know that you're sincere that you want this duty to report to show that the Bill is effective in stopping smacking as a punishment, and also that it is not as harmful to parents as perhaps some of us fear. But, if this were me bringing forward this Bill, I think I'd want to show the world that I was doing the right thing a lot sooner than you appear to wish to do. Amendment 2 means that the efficacy of the Bill will not formally be assessed until seven years after it has passed. If you're relying on the two-year period before section 1 comes into operation to do much of the heavy lifting on the culture change, and I think that is what you're expectingyou know, showing a reduction in the incidence of physical punishment, reducing the number of, and indeed the likelihood of, parents putting themselves in the path of criminal liability once those two years are upI really would have thought you'd want people to know sooner, or as soon as the first possible opportunity on that. Waiting five years, I think, will diminish the ability of you to prove the efficacy of those initial two years, and this is why I'm grateful to you for your offer, because there may be a way where we can overcome that. If the trend of culture change is continuing after year 3so, basically, in the first year after section 1 comes into effectthat's great, but there's a possibility it's going to reverse. For myself, I think one year would probably be enough, but I think three years is a reasonable compromise, as opposed to five years, for a reporting period. I can't see the reason for quite that length of timeI know you've talked about New Zealandbut neither can the Constitutional and Legislative Affairs Committee. When they took the step of recommending this duty to evaluate and report, they also took the step of suggesting a three-year reporting period being more in keeping with other post-legislative scrutiny. That's something I think we perhaps need to bear in mind now, as we enter this period of the consolidation of law. Five/seven years is really something of an outlier, and while that might have been appropriate, perhaps, in New Zealand, I don't think that fits in with our timetables generally here in Wales, and, of course, there are other countries that have introduced this over a period of years, and I note that you haven't drawn on them in order to support your argument. So, can I urge Members and the Minister to consider the arguments behind these amendments? I don't think it's going to reassure anyoneyou may want to intervene at this point, Hefinthat we not only won't hear in this Assembly, we won't hear in the next Assembly, about the formal evaluation of this, unless I follow hefin david am: I won't intervene; I'll speak. suzy davies am: Is that okay? hefin david am: Yes, I'll make the point. lynne neagle am: Okay, I've got suzy davies am: Yes, I'll take the intervention. lynne neagle am: No,he doesn't want to make an intervention hefin david am: I won't do an intervention; I'll speak. suzy davies am: Oh, apologies hefin david am: Just to say suzy davies am: I'll wait. The point I was making about 1D and 1E is they close down choices to Ministers in future Assemblies. An evaluative practice would actually open up those choices and give future Parliaments more options with regard to this Bill, so I think it's entirely consistent. I don't think the Minister, in putting in amendment 2, was trying to undermine my argument. Actually, I think she's being constructive by doing that, and I think amendment 2 is a practical amendment that's quite helpful, and its consequence will be to open up choices to future Parliaments, whereas my objection to 1D and 1E is they close those down. suzy davies am: Okay, well, as I say, I think, actually,the Deputy Minister's offer of a three-year interim period might be part of a resolution to this. Because I'm not 100 per cent sure I accept your argument, either, because it closes it down for the interim period if we don't move on with the Deputy Minister's suggestionwhich I'll talk about now, actually. But I need some clarity on what you would allow this Assembly to do in helping define the terms of that interim report. Because you've been very clear that you don't want to accept the things that Janet Finch-Saunders has been talking about in a final report, and yet I can tell you we want to hear about these things. So, if you're in a position where you can give a commitment at Stage 3 not only to introduce an interim report, but that you will consult with, perhaps, this committeeI'll leave it to youon the contents of that interim report, what we would want to see tested, then I'll be minded not to move amendment 2B. If you can't give me that reassurance, then I'm going to move it anyway and we'll return to it at Stage 3, if you don't mind. Just a final point on this issue of reporting within three months rather than as soon as practicable, and I do take your point that there may be a misalignment with reporting periods from the organisations you hope to talk to. Again, at Stage 3, I'm happy if you want to make three months six months, or something like that, but 'as soon as practicable' is open ended, and what you think is practicable may be very different from what I or my constituents think is practicable. So, I don't want to stick with what is practicable; I would like you to put a date on this. If it's a case that you think six months is long enough for data gathering and reporting from third parties, I think that's fairly reasonable as well, but I'm not minded to allow you to just keep this open ended. sian gwenllian am: Yes, I welcome adding to the Bill through amendment 2, and what you've said today also, that you're willing to provide an interim report and bring an amendment forward to allow that through the Bill, and to lay a report before the Assembly. I am interested in what Suzy is saying, and have a lot of sympathy with trying to tie it down to specific time periods, and not say 'when it will be practicable'. Therefore, I would encourage you not to move your amendments if you have the confirmation that you want to hear this morning from the Minister regarding these issues. julie morgan am: Well, just to start off on that point, I think your suggestion about how we consult and discuss, I think I'm very happy to accept that. So, I'm happy to discuss that with you, and with the committee, before the third Stage. Well, just to go on to cover some of the points that have been raised, on the issue of training now, I think Janet raised a number of points about training, and we do have an operations, procedures, processes and training task and finish group as part of our implementation work, and they are considering guidance and training requirements. There are many professional bodies represented on that group, many of whom I think have given evidence here today, and they've really got a chance to have their say. The officials are also looking at training as part of the revision of the explanatory memorandum at Stage 3, so there will be more information about training there. Generally, I think that all the contributions are very helpful, and I know they're meant in the spirit of trying to improve the legislation. I can't support amendments 2A, 2C, and amendments 2E to 2K, because these amendments make little difference in terms of practical effect to what we have in the Bill already, or they're covered by the Government amendments that I've moved. But I do hope the committee is reassured that we are committed to undertaking a very thorough, multifaceted review of the impact of the legislation that includes tracking public attitudes and considering impacts onpublic services. Now, tracking the public attitudes will be going along at regular points, so there's no question there of having to wait; we'll be having regular reporting of public attitudes. Of course, I appreciate that you will not be supporting these amendments, but can you give us some indication of how many of the areas of interest to us you will be reporting on? So, even if this is not a statutory commitment, what exactly from our list, our wish list here, would you be prepared to include in your evaluation? julie morgan am: Well, I would actually have thought all of them. Obviously, this is not a statutory thing I'm saying, but suzy davies am: No, no, and this is not a julie morgan am: Yes, but considering those points you've put forward, I think all of them have got a great deal of relevance. We will certainly be reporting to the group to consider any of the ideas that you've suggested and, in particular with the data collection and the monitoring task and finish group, which is about developing methods to collect data, we will be putting forward some of the suggestions that you've made on those issues. I'm hopeful you may withdraw the two amendmentsI think one of yours and it was one of Janet's, wasn't itso that we could work together on those before the next stage. Because I am sympathetic to your views on these matters, and I think they do reflect some of the discussions in the committee as well. In line with the recommendations of the Finance Committee, further details of the costs associated with the post-implementation review will be provided in a revised regulatory impact assessment at Stage 3. So, I think at this point I would ask that Members reject the non-Government amendments and agree to my amendments 2 and 5, which will ultimately achieve the same policy aim without the need for unnecessary detail on the Bill, with the exception, obviously, of those two amendments, which I'm prepared to look at a way of moving forward on. Does any Member object? [Objection.] We have an objection, so I'll take a vote by show of hands. Suzy, do you wish to move amendment 2A? suzy davies am: I move amendment 2A, yes. lynne neagle am: Janet, do you wish to move amendment 2E? janet finch-saunders am: I move. Does any Member object? [Objection.] We have an objection, so can I see all those in favour of amendment 2F? All those against. Does any Member object? [Objection.] Okay, can I see all those in favour of amendment 2G? All those against. Does any Member object? [Objection.] We have an objection, so can I see all those in favour of amendment 2H? All those against? So, there voted two in favour, four against. Does any Member object? [Objection.] We have an objection, so I'll take a vote. Can I see all those in favour of 2J? All those against? So, there voted two in favour, four against. Does any Member object? [Objection.] I'll therefore take a vote by show of hands. All those in favour of amendment 2K? All those against? So, there voted two in favour, four against. Suzy, do you wish to move amendment 2B? suzy davies am: In view of the Deputy Minister's reassurances, I won't move this amendment today, but obviously I reserve the right to bring something back if we can't reach consensus. lynne neagle am: Does any other Member wish to move amendment 2B? Okay, no. Deputy Minister, do you wish to proceed to a vote on amendment 2? julie morgan am: I do. I move amendment 3 in the Deputy Minister's name and call on the Deputy Minister to speak to her amendments and the other amendments in this group. Members will note that I've brought forward an amendment to provide certainty on the date of commencement of the core provision in the Bill, which is obviously to abolish the defence of reasonable punishment. So, we're obviously debating that after we deal with these particular technical issuesthese are technical issues here, basically. As a consequence of proposing to remove the power for a Welsh Minister to make an Order for commencement, the power to make transitory, transitional or saving provisions in connection with section 1 of the Bill coming into force would also be removed. So, I'm not seeking here to add any new powers to the Bill; amendment 3 will simply add this existing power back onto the face of the Bill where amendments 7 and 8 remove it, and amendment 6 will bring the power into force the day after Royal Assent. In fact, removing the power for the Welsh Ministers to commence the provision in section 1 by Order means the statutory instrument will actually do less than originally intended. These amendments are technical in nature and while I acknowledge that the Constitutional and Legislative Affairs Committee raised the issue of what procedure should be applied, their report did not call for any change to no procedure being applied. The absence of an Assembly procedure does not mean that Ministers' decisions in relation to transitional powers cannot be scrutinised by the Assembly. This was a point made to CLAC and, as I say, their final conclusion was that no procedure is the appropriate procedure for such a power. Well perhaps, Deputy Minister, I can begin by saying that one person's technical issue is another person's essential part of the legislative procedure and a keen element in scrutiny. But I thank you for noting the Assembly's observations on the ministerial powers granted in this Billthis time by CLAC, as you say. Moving thisand I'm glad actually that amendment 8, I think it was, has removed an Order provision and we're moving into an area where at least statutory instruments do feature here. I have to say that amendment 3A is something of a probing amendment, and I'll explain why now. Your amendment 3 seeks to give a familiar range of powers in connection with the coming into force of section 1, but it's actually in a substantive part of section 1 itself nowit's not a separate commencement power. And, actually, I've been listening to the rest of this debate, and thinking that, if you're going to be introducing an awareness campaign and a report, the chances are you're going to need some regulatory powers to introduce some of the aspects of both those policy areas, I think. And I'm wondering whether thewhat is ittransitory, transitional and saving provisions are actually enough powers for you under the course of this Bill. I'm wondering whether you want to consider actually amending this to give yourself the more usual unrestricted power to make regulations in order for you to get section 1 implemented, bearing in mind that it has now been amended from that original, very short and simpleor at least simple in terms of draftinginitial draft. As I say, in anticipation of you rejecting amendments in group 1 I tabled this, in order to make sure that an opportunity remains for the Assembly to bring anything you may wish to introduce under section 1, when it comes into effect, onto the floor of the Assembly. Because while I completely accept that you've acknowledged that statutory instrument is the process for introducing things from now on, it's still possible to do that without procedure, and so I have no idea whether you think what you introduce would be better suited to be introduced by a negative or affirmative procedure. Amendment 3A is a holding position, which we will return to you in Stage 3, because I think, again, this is an area where it might be valuable for us to discuss quite what kind of powers you're looking for, because I think you probably need something that's beyond transitional, transitory and saving. lynne neagle am: Are there any other Members who wish to speak on this group? No. We don't actually think it's necessary to have wider powers, but we will keep this under review and at Stage 3, I think that. When I was looking at this, I was concerned to know what the transitory powerswhat we would actually need to do at that stage, but I can understand that there may be links to other Bills in ways that we are not anticipating at the moment that would make it necessary to have those powers. So, basically, I don't think it is necessary to have wider powers, but I can assure you that we'll keep that in review coming up to Stage 3. suzy davies am: Can I just ask a question on the back of that? lynne neagle am: Will you take a brief intervention at the end, Minister? suzy davies am: Will you take the briefest intervention before your full stop? julie morgan am: I was going to end there, yes. suzy davies am: Right, okay, well, just before your full stop, would you just confirm that you're happy for us to discuss this before Stage 3? julie morgan am: Yes, very happy. Suzy, do you wish to move amendment 3A? suzy davies am: I'll move it, yes. Does any Member object? [Objection.] Okay, I'll take a vote by show of hands. Deputy Minister, do you wish to proceed to a vote on amendment 3? julie morgan am: I do. The committee will now break for 10 minutes and reconvene at 11.05 a.m. Can I welcome Members back? We will move on to group 4, which relates to the duty to ensure sufficient funding. As I outlined under amendments 2I and 2J, there are ongoing concerns about the potential costs for Welsh devolved authorities and the lack of quantifiable costs within the regulatory impact assessment. Now, it was absolutely clear from evidence that we received in this committee that unknown costs would be challenging and potentially problematic. As I have mentioned previously, these concerns would doubtless be most keenly felt in our hard-pressed social services. Furthermore, the Welsh Local Government Association stated that there must be a commitment that whatever the costs are, those costs are met, because it is legislation that is being led by the National Assembly for Wales. Now, during evidence, the Deputy Minister, when asked about the reliance on a limited number of reporting of cases likely to happen and the potential for a degree of unknown costs stated: 'we are doing our very best to prepare to cover all eventualities that we can anticipate.' But you couldn't commit to a broad figure, instead telling us that: 'we have to rely on what the people who run those organisations are telling us.' And: 'We have to measure it as we go along.' Given that devolved authorities need to plan their budgets for these changes, we only think it is fair for the Welsh Government to provide sufficient funding to alleviate the cost implications of this Bill. Now, while amendment 11 makes reference to costs borne by local authorities and health boards, I note that amendment 12 takes this further by including other devolved authorities that are not funded by Welsh Government. Anticipating the Deputy Minister's response that few under this category, if any at all, would be affected by the Bill, we are pursuing a principle here, and it is agreement to the principle of providing sufficient funding that we are seeking from you as the Deputy Minister. The Active Travel (Wales) Act 2013: last year, the Economy, Infrastructure and Skills Committee found that the Wales annual spend on walking and cycling is half that of England's and one sixth of Holland's. Furthermore, the committee highlighted that the passing of the Act put a requirement on local authorities to continuously improve active travel routes, but were constrained by the funding made available to them. Now, my local authority and other authorities that have done some monitoring on the active travel Actthey simply were not awarded sufficient funding to actually allow the active travel Act to become a meaningful piece of legislation, and the same goes with the Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015. This month, the auditor general has raised concerns that the public services boards created under the Act were limited in their work and impact due to the lack of dedicated funding. Outside of the Welsh Government's regional grant that cannot be spent on projects, councils often contribute through officer time or facilities, but resources and capacity to support those PSBs remain a key risk, as partners don't have the capacity to take on more. The reason that I wanted these amendments placed in here is I genuinely do not believe that you've even envisioned what, or even estimated the likely cost to be borne by the organisations, and certainly our local authorities and health boards, the impact this Bill is going to have. I can understand that the Member is concerned about the impact of this Bill on public services, but you will see from the explanatory memorandum and from the raft of impact statements published with the Bill that we've done a thorough and extremely diligent job of considering the potential impacts of this Bill before introduction. And as far as we're aware, no other country has done more than us to consider the impacts of similar legislation, and also comprehensively prepared for implementation. We've explored the published data, which is available from other countries, on the impact of measures they've taken to prohibit the physical punishment of children. We've also spoken to a range of stakeholders in Ireland, New Zealand and Malta, who have legal systems similar to our own. And stakeholders have been clear when giving evidence to this committee that they do not consider there will be runaway costs, and I think we should trust their judgment on this. In fact, as this committee notes in its Stage 1 report, those delivering services on the front line have said, without exception, that 'this Bill will improve their ability to protect children living in Wales because it will make the law clear.' Sally Jenkins of the Association of Directors of Social Services said to this committee: 'In terms of thresholds for childrens services, we would not be anticipating a huge number of referrals to us. Jane Randall, chair of the National Independent Safeguarding Board Wales, said: 'there's no expectation that there's going to be a huge increase in the number of referrals coming through to local authority social services, I think it would be dealt with within their existing resources.' And Dr Rowena Christmas, Royal College of General Practitioners, said: 'I can't see it's going to lengthen consultations. I can't see that it's going to increase the number of consultations, and I don't think it's going to increase the number of referrals I make to the health visitor or to social services, because if I was worried, I'd make those referrals now regardless of the Bill.' I just want to say again that the Bill is removing a defence to an offence of common assault, which has formed part of the common law of England and Wales for a very long time. And social services already receive and investigate reports of children being assaulted, including from health and education, so it's not a whole new area of costly activity for any of them. As I've already pointed out when discussing group 2 amendments, we're working with organisations to put in place arrangements to collect data about the possible impact on their services, and this will be analysed as part of the post-implementation review of the legislation. Welsh Government can consider with relevant organisations how best to manage any impact on workloads or resources and any cost implications. I can assure you that work to update the regulatory impact assessment has continued, and I've asked officials to prepare a revised RIA, as recommended at Stage 2, and I expect to share an updated RIA with you in advance of Stage 3. Serious consideration is being given on how to provide more detailed estimates of the unknown costs to public services arising from the Bill, but I think you should be reassured by the evidence that was given, particularly to this committee, from the professionals at the front line. What the amendments are proposing is outside the normal funding arrangements that operate within Government, and it's not clear why, in the context of the evidence heard at Stage I, such provisions are necessary. I'm sure that Members will agree that future Governments need to be able to consider, within the context of the budget-setting process, what the priorities are, and these considerations would need to be made within the context at that time, for example taking into account any issues that there areUK Government actions, what happens in relation to Brexit, or any other unforeseen impacts on the economy or Welsh society. Furthermore, as is the case now, the National Assembly for Wales scrutinises the Welsh Government budget annually, so it would be able to make an argument for additional funding for public bodies, should it consider that this is required. I do think all the evidence has shown that we do not anticipate that there will be a huge increase of a demand for funding, so I urge Members to reject these amendments, which I believe are unnecessary. janet finch-saunders am: Chair, could I ask a question? lynne neagle am: You can reply to the debate now, Janet, yes. When we were taking evidence, at an earlier stage, I noticed that part of the stakeholder groupthere was some liaison going on with social services departments across Wales. What discussions have taken place with our local authorities in terms of their social services departments in terms of the lead, the cabinet members, or, indeed, the head of service? I can speak from my own experiences, when going around my constituency, but when I've spoken to some of the family support groups, and, indeed, the departments themselves, they are very concerned about the financial impact that this is going to have on the provision. They're already overstretched, and they see this as another burdenprimarily another financial burden. So, how much have you engaged with them? julie morgan am: There's been extensive engagement. We've had meetings with the Association of Directors of Social Services, and they're represented on all our groups, and we're working very closely with them, because, of course, they represent all the local authorities. But I have to say, when I've been going round and meeting lots of different groups, the first thing they say is, 'I'm so glad that you're doing this', and they haven't mentioned any financial implications. But, obviously, we will be very aware ofwe are looking at any more evidence that comes up. I was hoping to see some commitment tothis Bill was going to go through, and it's one that could be implemented fully, because sufficient resources were there. Janet, do you wish to proceed to a vote on amendment 12? janet finch-saunders am: I move. Deputy Minister, do you wish to proceed to a vote on amendment 4? julie morgan am: Yes. Does any Member object? [Objection.] We have an objection, so I'll take a vote. Deputy Minister, do you want to proceed to a vote on amendment 5? julie morgan am: Yes. Does any Member object? [Objection.] We have an objection, so I'll take a vote. Deputy Minister, do you want to move to a vote on amendment 6? julie morgan am: Yes. lynne neagle am: I move amendment 6, then, in the name of the Deputy Minister. And I call Suzy Davies to move amendment 9 and to speak to the amendment and the other amendments in the group. Amendment 9 is actually consequential on amendment 10 passing, but it's the lead amendment in the group, so I'll move it to begin the debate. You've said repeatedly, and I believe you, that you do not wish to criminalise parents but just to stop them physically punishing their children. You could have chosen to try and achieve this through awareness raising and civil enforcement, but by choosing to remove the defence to a criminal act you have entered the arena of criminal law, where the logical consequence is opening parents up to liabilitynot necessarily getting prosecuted, but liability to prosecution, not just liability to civil sanctions. I'm sure you'd prefer parents not to be prosecuted, but that decision does not and cannot lie with you. You, like us, have no agency in this, because the powers and the duties of the police and the Crown Prosecution Service sit outside our competence. You cannot and we cannot, by law or otherwise, instruct either of them in the delivery of your policy intention of not criminalising parents. You've acknowledged to this committee and the Constitutional and Legislative Affairs Committee that revised CPS charging guidance and any other guidance on, for example, out-of-court disposals, are key to delivering your policy objectives. You'll remember how concerned this committee was when we learned that your advisory groupthe strategic implementation group, is itwas only in the early stages of discussing what these guidelines might look like. So, you're actually asking us to pass law when we have no control over how parents might be punished for smacking their childrenno control of the regard given to the relevance of force, the frequency of the offence, any prior conviction, any prior reporting, not even the views of the child in how they might be sentenced, or thresholds that would be appropriate for cautions and other out-of-court disposals; no guidance to the police on thresholds for arrest, let alone charging. And you argue that the rights of the child are what matter, and I agree with you here, but everybody, adult or child, has a right to natural justice and proportionate remedy or censure, and you are in no position to offer us any comfort on these matters at this stage. I anticipate that that's unlikely, and I hope I'm wrong, but that's why Janet and I have tabled amendments 10 and 15, which prevent you bringing section 1 into force until that CPS guidance has been fully updated to take into account the change in the law and until pathways away from prosecution have been devised and agreed. That reflects our recommendation 4, this committee's recommendation, as well as CLAC's recommendation 1. It gives your strategic implementation board time to consider how it can get around the other fundamentally worrying issue of the effect of recording reports of apparent physical punishment, even if those reports ultimately prove unfounded. I have to say, Minister, I think these points are so serious that I would have liked to have tabled amendments preventing you seeking Royal Assent for this Bill until the Assembly has seen drafts of the range of official guidance needed for the police and CPS. I'd have sought a Report Stage, if I could, so that we could consider that evidence. But I'm therefore asking you to support the amendments we have tabled, 10 and 15, so that we can bring some damage limitation to a process that you ultimately cannot control once this Bill has passed. Now, I know you've got the numbers to pass this Bill, whether you accept amendments or not, but I just hope you can see the danger in pushing forward with a Bill that changes a person's relationship with the criminal law when you have no legal control over the consequences of that, and you're inviting this Assembly to fall into the same trap. Janet, do you want to speak? janet finch-saunders am: Yes, I wish to speak to amendments 14 and 16. As was clear during the committee's evidence sessions, present Welsh Government support programmes for parents have insufficient coverage. For example, the capacity and reach of the Healthy Child Wales programme came under question on its role in awareness raising, with health representatives acknowledging that universality had not been achieved, with 53.2 per cent of children in Wales reported as being contacted. Furthermore, existing parenting support is often only available as part of a targeted programme in specific areas, such as Flying Start, and even the children's commissioner noted that much more is needed to support parents to find alternatives to disciplining their children. Now, the Deputy Minister mentioned the 'Parenting: Give it Time' campaign as part of proposals on a wider package of support for children and their parents. However, the Deputy Minister was challenged on this fact, that this is an online campaign only, and could only respond that the mapping exercise she will undertake. Therefore, the Deputy Minister needs to assure the committee and the public that universal support will be provided before the removal of the defence occurs. I've listened to what stakeholders and committees have said about the importance of ensuring sufficient time is available prior to the change in the law to abolish the defence of reasonable punishment during Stage 1. As a result, I have brought forward amendments in this group to provide certainty around the date for the change in the law. My amendment 7 will remove the power to commence this core provision of the Bill by Order of the Welsh Ministers and ensure that the defence of reasonable punishment is abolished at the end of a two-year period beginning the day after Royal Assent. Up to then, we'd always said 'up to two years'well, we're giving two years. This certainty will allow key partners, including the police, social services and the Crown Prosecution Service, to plan for changes to guidance, training and data-collection systems more effectively. My amendment 8 in this group has the consequence of removing the power to make transitional provision, which is replaced by my amendments 3 and 6, and we discussed those in the previous group. I've listened to the arguments put forward by Suzy Davies and Janet Finch-Saunders for the amendments in this group that they have tabled. These amendments are all about making the commencement of the Bill conditional on something else happening, whether it's waiting for the revision of Crown Prosecution Service guidance, or the establishment of a pathway for diversion from the criminal justice system, or for the provision of parenting support services. As I set out in my letter of response to the Stage 1 report from the Constitutional and Legislative Affairs Committee, we've got good working relations with the CPS through the strategic implementation group, and we work very closely with them. But the CPS are an independent body, as Suzy Davies has said in her contribution, not answerable to Welsh Ministers or this legislature, and it's not appropriate for a Minister or the National Assembly to seek to influence the CPS guidelines. And, in fact, I think that these amendmentsSuzy's amendments in particularwouldn't just seek to influence the CPS, but would actually give power to a non-devolved body on the way that we legislate in Wales. I think you have to rely on the fact that we have got this very good relationship, very close working relationship. And I think legislating to effectively give a non-devolved body a power to commence, or not, Assembly legislation would be highly unusual and would raise great uncertainty, I think, if we did go down that track, because I think this is very important Welsh legislation, which does have broad support across the Assembly. And I don't think we should allow non-devolved bodies to be the final arbiters of commencement of our legislation. I think the CPS is entirely independent of Government, and must be entirely independent of Government, and will make its own decisions about how and when it will revise its guidance. In addition, you suggest we allow the UK Government to have a say in when Welsh legislation is commenced in an area that was specifically devolved to the Assembly. If these amendments passed, it would be very difficult, if not impossible, to judge when section 1 could be commenced. This contravenes what stakeholders and committees have asked for, and raises huge uncertainty, which potentially jeopardises the Bill. And I want to assure you again, not only do we have good working relations with the CPS, but also very good working relationships with the police, who are, of course, the other non-devolved body who have great involvement and interest in these issues. My amendment to provide a two-year period between Royal Assent and commencement means these groups can plan their work to a known timescale and deliver in good time before the law comes into force. And then, when it comes to parenting support, the committee knows that I've committed to reviewing the existing provision of parenting support, and work is already under way through the parenting expert group on this very issue. I have already said I will expand the age range of the 'Parenting: Give it Time' campaign, and I think. For example, the universal service of the health visitors is absolutely crucial, and that is a service that is for every child. And the expert group is considering what it'll recommend for the future, and it needs the time to be able to do that, to support the Bill as well as to support parenting more widely. So, as I said, I think these are important points that you have raised, but I don't think they are appropriate. So, I therefore urge the committee not to support amendments 9 and 10, nor 13, 14 and 15. suzy davies am: Thank you very much, and thank you very much, Deputy Minister, as well. I'm disappointed that you haven't seen what's behind Janet Finch-Saunders's final amendment there, actually. Maybe it's something we'll raise again with you at Stage 3, or maybe in the conversations that we have between now and then. But I want to go back to amendments 10 and 15 that I've raised and your assertion that we're giving, or attempting to give, power to the CPS here. And this is why I go back to where my contribution to this started, and it's your choice to try and resolve the problem ofor, sorry, to try and protect children's rights through the medium of a change to the criminal law rather than the many opportunities that were available to you through the civil law and over which you would have had complete competence. This Billand, actually, you've said a couple of times in your response today that it's important that it's commenced on a certain date. My argument is: it shouldn't be commenced at all unless you are absolutely certain about how it is likely to affect the parents who will now be captured by the removal of the defence. And, while I claim no mischief on the part of the CPS or the policeobviously I don'tthere is nothing you can do that would prevent the CPS, should they wish to do it, or indeed the police with their own guidelines, putting in place something that is wholly disproportionate to the offence that is now being released by the removal of a defence. And, because of that, I ask you to consider, or balance, actually, two important things here: one is the rights of the child, obviously at the forefront of your argument on this, which I would argue could be completely and safely protected through the use of civil law on this occasion; and, actually, the rights of the child again to have a good relationship with parents over whose future they will have no sayor at least you cannot allow them to have any say in how those parents might be treated in terms of sentencing. The relationship between parents and children obviously is different in every family, but that's something you ought to protect in what you're trying to do here, and by leaving it open, as you say, to completely differentsorry, undevolved, two undevolved authorities to make decisions about how that relationship could be affected deeply worries me. I know this isn't going to stop your Bill going forward, but I really want you to consider my arguments and how you might try and address them at Stage 3, because leaving, effectively, the delivery of your policy objectives to somebody over whom you have no control, despite your great relationship with them, should worry us all as a legislature. Do you wish to proceed to a vote on amendment 9? suzy davies am: Oh, because of the voting order. Does any Member object? [Objection.] We have an objection, so I'll take a vote. Deputy Minister, do you wish to move to a vote on amendment 7? julie morgan am: I do. lynne neagle am: I move amendment 7 in the name of the Deputy Minister.The question is that amendment 7 be agreed. Does any Member object? [Objection.] We have an objection, so I'll take a vote. Does any Member object? [Objection.] We have an objection, so I'll take a vote. Deputy Minister, do you wish to proceed to a vote on amendment 8? julie morgan am: I do. Well, that has brought us to the end of our amendments, so can I thank the Deputy Minister and her officials for their attendance? As usual, you will be sent a transcript of the meeting to check for factual accuracy. Standing Orders make provision for the Deputy Minister to prepare a revised explanatory memorandum, taking account of the amendments agreed today. Paper to note 1 is a letter from the Deputy Minister for Health and Social Services, following our meeting on 2 October. Paper to note 2 is a letter from the Minister for Health and Social Services updating the committee on the 'Healthy Weight: Healthy Wales' strategy. And paper to note 3 is a letter from myself to the Deputy Minister for Health and Social Services regarding early childhood education and care, following the session that we held on 2 October. Item 4, then, is for me to propose, in accordance with Standing Order 17.42, that the committee resolves to meet in private for the remainder of the meeting
, why don't we s again start off with with , Yeah , I 'll get it . And then , given that , Liz and Andreas are gonna be ten , fifteen minutes late , we can try to figure out what we can do most effectively without them here .  , what else ? grad f:  professor d:  What 's SmartKom ? SmartKom ? grad f: we wanna talk about if w if we wanna add the data to the mar Meeting Recorder corpus . professor d: What what what are we collecting here ? phd e: Data ? grad f: So why don't we have that on the agenda and we 'll we 'll get to it and talk about it ? phd e: The SmartKom data ? professor d: Yeah , right . I think it was Andreas wanted to talk about segmentation and recognition , and update on SRI recognition experiments . professor d:  grad f: And then if ti if there 's time I wanted to talk about digits , but it looked like we were pretty full , so I can wait till next week . I think the a certainly the segmentation and recognition we wanna maybe focus on when An - Andreas is here since that was particularly his thing . phd e: And also the SmartKom thing should b professor d: SmartKom also , Andreas . professor d:  So , I think they 'll be inter I 'll be interested in all this , but but , probably , if we had to pick something that we would talk on for ten minutes or so while they 're coming here . Or I guess it would be , you think , reorganization status , or ? grad f: Yeah . phd b: maybe I said maybe we said this before just that we met and we talked about it and we sort of have a plan for getting things organized and postdoc a: And I and I think a crucial part of that is the idea of of not wanting to do it until right before the next level zero back - up so that there won't be huge number of of added , phd b: Right . Not not much @ @ grad f: Although Dave basically said that if we wanna do it , just tell him and he 'll do a d level zero then . phd b: Oh , so maybe we should just go ahead and get everything ready , and grad f: Yep . So , I think we do need to talk a little bit about Well , we don't need to do it during this meeting . So , naming conventions and things like that , that I 've been trying to keep actually up to date . postdoc a: I 'm sorry , you 've been what ? Showing them ? professor d: OK . Well , maybe  , since that that was a pretty short one , maybe we should talk about the IBM transcription status . So , we ,  we did another version of the beeps , where we separated each beeps with a spoken digit . Chuck came up here and recorded some di himself speaking some digits , and so it just goes " beep one beep " and then the phrase , and then " beep two beep " and then the phrase .  , I think they 'll have a b easier time keeping track of where they are in the file . grad f: And we did it with the automatic segmentation , and I don't think We ne we didn't look at it in detail . phd b: And grad f: I sorta spot - checked here and there and it sounded pretty good . grad f: And , we 'll just hafta see what we get back from them .  phd b: And the main thing will be if we can align what they give us with what we sent them . phd b: And I think we 'll be able to do that at with this new beep format . grad f: so the problem wi last time is that there were errors in the transcripts where they put beeps where there weren't any , or and they put in extraneous beeps . phd b: Yeah , one interesting note is  , or problem I dunno if this was just because of how I play it back , I say , SND - play and then the file , every once in a while , @ @  , like a beep sounds like it 's cut into two beeps . phd b: Yeah , and I I dunno if that 's an , artifact of playback phd e: Yeah . But with this new format , that hopefully they 're not hearing that , and if they are , it shouldn't throw them . grad f: Well , maybe we better listen to it again , make sure , but , certainly the software shouldn't do that , phd b: Yeah . phd b: I it 's probably just , you know , mmm , somehow the audio device gets hung for a second , phd e: Yeah . phd e: Yeah ? postdoc a: As long as they have one number , and they know that there 's only one beep maximum that goes with that number . postdoc a: Well , you know , actually , are we having them phd b: So th grad f: " Seven four eight beep seven beep eight three two " . postdoc a: Yeah , but are we having them do digits ? grad f: Yes . Because , we don't we didn't In order to cut them out we 'd have to listen to it . phd b: We can we can ignore it when we get it back , grad f: Although we could tell them we could tell them , if you hear someone reading a digits string just say " bracket digit bracket " phd b: huh . That 'd be what I 'm having the transcribers here do , cuz it can be extracted later . And then I wanted to talk about but as I said I we may not have time what we should do about digits . professor d: Le - let 's talk about it , because that 's that 's something that I I know Andreas is less interested in than Liz is , grad f: OK . It 's good grad f: Do we have anything else to say about transcription ? About IBM stuff ? phd b: Brian I I sent bresset sent Brian a message about the meeting and I haven't heard back yet .  , how 're we doing on the on the rest of it ? postdoc a: We 're doing well . postdoc a: And , I 've prepared , a set of five which I 'm which I 'm calling set two , which are now being edited by my head transcriber , in terms of spelling errors and all that . She 's also checking through and mar and and monitoring , the transcription of another transcriber . postdoc a: And , I 've moved on now to what I 'm calling set three . I sort of thought if I do it in sets groups of five , then I can have , like , sort of a a parallel processing through through the the current . postdoc a: And and you indicated to me that we have a g a goal now , for the for the , the , DARPA demo , of twenty hours . So , I 'm gonna go up to twenty hours , be sure that everything gets processed , and released , and and that 's that 's what my goal is . Package of twenty hours right now , and then once that 's done , move on to the next . But I guess the other thing is that , that that 's kinda twenty hours ASAP because the longer before the demo we actually have the twenty hours , the more time it 'll be for people to actually do cool things with it . And and I don't think it 's possible , really , to do this full - time , but , that what it shows is motivation to do as many hours as possible . professor d: Yeah , I guess the So the difference if if , if the IBM stuff works out , the difference in the job would be that they p primarily would be checking through things that were already done by someone else ? postdoc a: Again . We 'll we 'll expect that they 'll have to move some time bins and do some corrections . postdoc a: And I you know , I 've also d  , discovered So with the new transcriber I 'm  So  , lemme say that my ,  So ,  At present , the people have been doing these transcriptions a channel at a time . And , that sort of , is useful , and t you know , and then once in a while they 'll have to refer to the other channels to clear something up . Well , I realize that , w i we we 're using the pre - segmented version , and , the pre - segmented version is extremely useful , and wouldn't it be , useful also to have the visual representation of those segments ? And so I 've  , I , I 've trained the new one  , the new the newest one , to , use the visual from the channel that is gonna be transcribed at any given time . Because what happens then , is you scan across the signal and once in a while you 'll find a blip that didn't show up in the pre - segmentation . postdoc a: And that 'll be something like I it 's ver it 's interesting . A backchannel , or postdoc a: Once in a while it 's a backchannel . postdoc a: Sometimes it seems to be , similar to the ones that are being picked up . postdoc a: And they 're rare events , but you can really go through a meeting very quickly . You just you just , you know , yo you s you scroll from screen to screen , looking for blips . And , I think that we 're gonna end up with ,  better coverage of the backchannels , professor d: Yeah . postdoc a: but at the same time we 're benefitting tremendously from the pre - segmentation because there are huge places where there is just absolutely no activity at all . phd b: So they can they can , scroll through that pretty quick ? postdoc a: Yeah . So I think that that 's gonna , also eh , you know , speed the efficiency of this part of the process . grad f: so , we have a whole bunch of digits that we 've read and we have the forms and so on , but only a small number of that ha well , not a small number only a subset of that has been transcribed . And , Liz and Andreas actually they 're not here , but , they did say at one point that they thought they could do a pretty good job of just doing a forced alignment . And , again , I don't think we 'll be able to do with that alone , because , sometimes people correct themselves and things like that . But so , I was just wondering what people thought about how automated can we make the process of finding where the people read the digits , doing a forced alignment , and doing the timing . What about just actually doing recognition ? grad f: Well , we we know what they read , because we have the forms . phd b: Right , Morgan ? professor d:  phd b: Is that what you 're ? professor d: Yeah , I 'm I 'm not quite sure what I 'm talking about . And , there 's the issue that that they we know what what was said , but do we ? grad f: so one option i professor d: Because people make mistakes and stuff . I was just asking , just out of curiosity , if if with , the SRI recognizer getting one percent word error , would we would we do better ? So , if you do a forced alignment but the force but the but the transcription you have is wrong because they actually made mistakes , or false starts , it 's it 's much less c it 's much less common than one percent ? grad f: But that 's pretty uncommon . grad f: Well , I guess yeah , I guess if we segmented it , we could get one percent on digits . I 'm not saying it should be one way or the other , but it 's If grad f: But , Well , there there 're a couple different of doing it . You know , they 're doing it anyway , and unless we tell them different , they 're gonna transcribe it . professor d: Well grad f: And my my tendency right now is , well , if IBM comes back with this meeting and the transcript is good , just let them do it . professor d: Yeah , it 's Y you raised a point , kind of , euphemistically but , m maybe it is a serious problem . Ho - what will they do when they go hear " beep seven beep seven three five two "  , you think they 'll we 'll get ? grad f: It 's pretty distinct . postdoc a: Well it it well , it 'd be preceded by " I 'm reading transcript so - and - so " ? phd b: Yeah . postdoc a: So , I think if they 're processing it at grad f: it 'll be it will be in the midst of a digit string . grad f: So  it sure , there there might be a place where it 's " beep seven beep eight beep eight beep " . But , you know , they they 're they 're gonna macros for inserting the beep marks . We 'll have to see , but I don't think it 's gonna be a problem . Well , I I I dunno , I I think that that 's if they are in fact going to transcribe these things , certainly any process that we 'd have to correct them , or whatever is needs to be much less elaborate for digits than for other stuff . grad f: We have so many of them , and it 'd be nice to actually do something with them . Yeah , I phd i: You mean there 're more than ten ? grad f: Anything else ? Your mike is a little low there . So ,  You you have to go a little early , right ? At twenty phd i: Well , I can stay till about , three forty . professor d: So there was some  In in Adam 's agenda list , he had something from you about segmentation this last recognition ? phd i: Well , yeah . phd i: so , we had a discussion Don and Liz and I had discussion last week about how to proceed with , you know , with Don 's work , phd e: Ch phd i: and and and , one of the obvious things that occur to us was that we 're since we now have Thilo 's segmenter and it works , you know , amazingly well , we should actually basically re - evaluate the recognition , results using you know , without cheating on the segmentations . phd e: So phd i: And , that should be fairly phd e: And how do we find the transcripts for those so that ? Yeah . So , there 's actually phd e: It 's not that phd i: Why do you ask ? grad f: I could phd i: No , actually , NIST has ,  m a fairly sophisticated scoring program that you can give a ,  a time , grad f: Hand ones . phd i:  You know , you basically just give two time - marked sequences of words , and it computes the  the ,  you know , the the th phd b: It does all the work for you . phd i: So , it we just and we use that actually in Hub - five to do the scoring . phd e: So , basically you give some time constraints for for the references and for for the hypothesis , phd i: So , we ha Yeah . phd g: Maybe the start of your speech and the end of it , phd i: So do phd e: OK .  , so that was the one thing , and the other was that ,  What was the other problem ? Oh ! That Thilo wanted to use the recognizer alignments to train up his , speech detector . phd i: so that we could use ,  you know there wouldn't be so much hand labelling needed to ,  to generate training data for for the speech detector . phd i: So , you can you can phd b: It 'll give you a lot more data , too . So , it 's basically s I think , eight meetings or something which which I 'm using , and , it 's before it was twenty minutes of one meeting . phd i: That won't be perfect the alignments aren't perfect , phd e: Yeah . But phd i: but , it 's probably still better to have all this extra data , than phd g: Yeah . If you find that you can lower the false alarms that you get where there 's no speech , that would be useful for us to know . So , r right now you get f fal you know , false false , speech regions when it 's just like , breath or something like that , phd e: OK . phd g: and I 'd be interested to know the wha if you retrain  , phd e: Yeah . I 'll can make an can , like , make a c comparison of of the old system to the to the new one , and then phd g: Yeah , just to see if by doing nothing in the modeling of just having that training data wh what happens . professor d:  another one that we had on Adam 's agenda that definitely involved you was s something about SmartKom ? grad f: Right . So , Rob Porzel eh , Porzel ? and the ,  Porzel and the , SmartKom group are collecting some dialogues . grad f: Basically they have one person sitting in here , looking at a picture , and a wizard sitting in another room somewhere . And , it involves starting I believe starting with a It 's it 's always the wizard , but it starts where the wizard is pretending to be a computer and it goes through a , speech generation system . And they wanted to use this equipment , and so the w question came up , is well , here 's some more data . Should this be part of the corpus or not ? And my attitude was yes , because there might be people who are using this corpus for acoustics , as opposed to just for language . So , I just wanted to understand it , cuz I I 'm  , hadn't quite followed this process . So , it 's wizard in the sen usual sense that the person who is asking the questions doesn't know that it 's , a machi not a machine ? phd i: Right . phd i: Actually actually , w w the the We do this I dunno who came up with it , but I think it 's a really clever idea . We simulate a computer breakdown halfway through the session , and so then after that , the person 's told that they 're now talking to a ,  to a human . grad f: But of course they don't know that it 's the same person both times . phd i: So , we we collect we collect both human - computer and human - human data , essentially , in the same session . professor d: You might wanna try collecting it the other way around sometime , saying that th the computer isn't up yet postdoc a:  . professor d: and then so then you can separate it out whether it 's the beginning or end kind of effects . " phd b: It 's a lot more believable , too , grad f: " No ! " phd b: if you tell them that they 're the computer part is running on a Windows machine . grad f: Abort abort , retry , fail ? phd g: So did they actually save the far - field data ? phd e: Yes . phd g: Cuz at first they weren't they weren't sa phd i: Yeah . grad f: and I said , " well that 's silly , if if we 're gonna try to do it for a corpus , there might be people who are interested in acoustics . professor d: S phd e: We wer we just wanted to do phd i: No , the the question is do we save one or two far - field channels or all of them ? phd g: Right . professor d:  grad f: That that if we have someone who is doing acoustic studies , it 's nice to have the same for every recording . phd i: It 's to be traini to b training data and development data for the SmartKom system . phd b: Where does this ? professor d:  phd g: Maybe we can have him vary the microphones , too , professor d: Well , phd e: B phd g: or they 're different s speakers . grad f: Right ? phd e: But but I 'm not sure about the legal aspect of of that . phd e: What they or , is is that our data which we are collecting here , professor d: We 've never signed anything that said that we couldn't use anything that we did . professor d: I L look , it seems to me that if we 're doing it anyway and we 're doing it for these these purposes that we have , and we have these distant mikes , we definitely should re should save it all as long as we 've got disk space , phd i:   professor d: So should we save it ? grad f: And then professor d: Now th Yeah . professor d: anybody who 's training something up could choose to put it eh , to u include this or not . But it 's some other data we have , and if somebody doing experiment wants to train up including that then they can . grad f: So it 's It it I guess it the begs the question of what is the meeting corpus . So if , at UW they start recording two - person hallway conversations is that part of the meeting corpus ? professor d: I think it 's I I think I th think the idea of two or more people conversing with one another is key . phd g: What if we just give it a a name like we give these meetings a name ? professor d: No , it doesn't . phd g: And then later on some people will consider it a meeting and some people won't , postdoc a: Well this professor d: Yeah . So so s so part of the reason that I wanted to bring this up is , do we wanna handle it as a special case or do we wanna fold it in , phd g: and Just give it a title . professor d: I think it is a s grad f: we give everyone who 's involved as their own user ID , give it session I Ds , let all the tools that handle Meeting Recorder handle it , or do we wanna special case it ? And if we were gonna special case it , who 's gonna do that ? phd e: So . phd i: Well , it it makes sense to handle it with the same infrastructure , since we don't want to duplicate things unnecessarily . phd e: It it it postdoc a: I think phd i: But as far as distributing it , we shouldn't label it as part of this meeting corpus . phd i: We should let it be its own corp postdoc a: Well it 's it well , because grad f: I don't see why not . professor d: It 's scenario - based , it 's it 's human - computer interface it 's really pretty different . professor d: But I I I have no problem with somebody folding it in for some experiment they 're gonna do , but I don't think i it it doesn't match anything that we 've described about meetings . professor d: Whereas everything that we talked about them doing at at UW and so forth really does . So w so what does that mean for how we are gonna organize things ? postdoc a:  . professor d: You can you can Again , as as I think Andreas was saying , if you wanna use the same tools and the same conventions , there 's no problem with that . It 's just that it 's , you know , different directory , it 's called something different , it 's you know . Right ? grad f: Yeah , but those are folded in , phd i: It might also be potentially confusing . grad f: and just simply in the file you mark somewhere that this is this type of interaction , rather than another type of interaction . phd i: Yeah , I th professor d: Well , I don I wouldn't call reading digits " meetings " . Right ?  , we we we were doing grad f: Well , but but , I put it under the same directory tree . professor d: Well grad f: You know , it 's in " user doctor speech data MR " . phd g: Can we just have a directory called , like , " other stuff " ? grad f: Other . My preference is to have a single procedure so that I don't have to think too much about things . professor d: O - You you can use whatever procedure you want that 's p convenient for you . grad f: If we do it any other way that means that we need a separate procedure , and someone has to do that . professor d: All I 'm saying is that there 's no way that we 're gonna tell people that reading digits is meetings . And similarly we 're not gonna tell them that someone talking to a computer to get travel information is meetings . But if it makes it easier for you to pu fold them in the same procedures and have them under the same directory tree , knock yourself out . phd b: There 's a couple other questions that I have too , professor d: You know ? phd b: and and one of them is , what about , consent issues ? And the other one is , what about transcription ? Are ? phd e: Transcription is done in Munich . phd i: That 's a that 's another argument to keep it separate , because it 's gonna follow the SmartKom transcription conventions and not the ICSI meeting transcription conventions . But I 'm sure no one would have a problem with our folding it in for some acoustic modeling or or some things . Do we h do we have , American - born folk , reading German German , pla  , place names and so forth ? Is that ? phd e: Yeah . professor d: Heidelberg grad f: So phd i: Exactly grad f: Disk might eventually be an issue so we might we we might need to , get some more disk pretty soon . grad f: We 're probably a little more than that because we 're using up some space that we shouldn't be on . So , once everything gets converted over to the disks we 're supposed to be using we 'll be probably , seventy - five percent . phd b: Well , when I was looking for space for Thilo , I found one disk that had , I think it was nine gigs and another one had seventeen .  grad f: Were those backed - up or non - backed - up ? phd b: Those were non - backed - up . The non - backed - up , phd b: I haven't looked to see how much of that we have . So , pretty much anytime we need a disk , we can get it at the rate that we 're phd i: You can I shouldn't be saying this , but , you can just you know , since the back - ups are every night , you can recycle the backed - up diskspace . professor d:  Yeah , I me and there 's been this conversation going on about getting another file server , and and we can do that . professor d: We 'll take the opportunity and get another big raft of of disk , I guess . phd i: Well , I think I think there 's an argument for having you know , you could use our old file server for for disks that have data that is very rarely accessed , and then have a fast new file server for data that is , heavily accessed . It 's the back it 's the back - up capaci grad f: It 's the back - up system . phd b: I think I think the file server could become an issue as we get a whole bunch more new compute machines . phd b: And we 've got , you know , fifty machines trying to access data off of Abbott at once . phd i: I think I think we 've raised this before and someone said this is not a reliable way to do it , but the What about putting the stuff on , like , C - CD - ROM or DVD or something ? grad f: Yeah . The the th phd i: But they wear out just from sitting on the shelf ? grad f: Yep . grad f: But the r the write once , and the read - writes , don't last . postdoc a: Would it be ? professor d: Year or two ? grad f: Yep . phd i: But if that then you would think you 'd hear much more clamoring about data loss phd e: Yeah . phd i: and professor d: yeah , all the L grad f: I I don't know many people who do it on CD .  , they 're the most fo professor d: LDC - all the LDC distributions are on CD - ROM . grad f: They 're on CD , but they 're not tha that 's not the only source . But if you go if you go k phd i: But , you know , we have phd g: But we have like thirty you know , from ten years ago ? professor d: We have all sorts of CD - ROMs from a long time ago . grad f: The the pressed ones last for phd g: usually they 're grad f: well , not forever , they 've been finding even those degrade . grad f: But , the burned ones  , when I say two or three years what I 'm saying is that I have had disks which are gone in a year . phd g: That 's what I grad f: On the average , it 'll probably be three or four years . But ,  I I you don't want to per p have your only copy on a media that fails . phd i: So how about ? So so how about putting them on that plus , like on a on on DAT or some other medium that isn't risky ? grad f: I think th  , we can already put them on tape . Well , if if if you if they last Say , they actually last , like , five years , huh , in in the typical case , and and occasionally you might need to recreate one , and then you get your tape out , but otherwise you don't . Can't you just you just put them on ? grad h: So you just archive it on the tape , and then put it on CD as well ? phd i: Yeah . phd b: What 'd be nice is a system that re - burned the C Ds every year . professor d: Well grad f: Well , the C Ds are are an op phd e: Yeah . professor d: You know I would think grad f: So for archiving , we 'll just use tape . phd i: One one thing I don't understand is , if you have the data if if you if the meeting data is put on disk exactly once , then it 's backed - up once and the back - up system should never have to bother with it , more than once . grad f: Well , regardless Well , first of all there was , a problem with the archive in that I was every once in a while doing a chmod on all the directories an or recursive chmod and chown , because they weren't getting set correctly every once in a while , phd i:   grad f: and I was just , doing a minus R star , not realizing that that caused it to be re - backed - up . phd i: But but this back - up system is smart enough to figure out that something hasn't changed and doesn't need to be backed - up again . professor d: The b I think th the at least the once tha that you put it on , it would it would kill that . grad f: Sure , but we still have enough changed that the nightly back - ups are starting to take too long . So , what if we buy , what what do they call these ,  high density ? grad f: Well , why don't you have this have a this conversation with Dave Johnson tha rather than with me ? phd i: No , no . Because this is maybe something that we can do without involving Dave , and and , putting more burden on him . How about we buy , one of these high density tape drives ? And we put the data actually on non - backed - up disks . And we do our own back - up once and for all all , and then and we don't have to bother this @ @ up ? grad f: Actually , you know , we could do that just with the tape with the current tape . What kind of tape drive is it ? grad f: I dunno but it 's an automatic robot so it 's very convenient . phd i: Is it is ? professor d: Wh The o the one that we have ? grad f: You just run a program to restore them . phd i: But it might interfere with their back - up schedule , phd g: But professor d: No , we have s we Don't we have our own ? phd i: eh . professor d: Something wi th that doesn't that isn't used by the back - up gang ? Don't we have something downstairs ? postdoc a: Well they phd b: What kinda tape drive ? professor d: Just in ? Yeah . So your your point is , and I think it 's a good one , that we could just get more disk and put it there . professor d: Yeah , that 's basically what I was gonna say , is that a disk is is so cheap it 's es essentially , you know , close to free . professor d: And we can take care of that by putting it on non - back up drives and just backing it up once onto this tape . phd g: So , who 's gonna do these back - ups ? The people that collect it ? grad f:  Well , I 'll talk to Dave , and and see what th how what the best way of doing that is . phd b: It 's probably gonna n grad f: There 's a little utility that will manually burn a tape for you , and that 's probably the right way to do it . That 's what I 'm wondering , if grad f: Well we 're g we 're gonna automate that . phd g: you don't have to physically put a tape in the drive ? grad f: No . phd i: Yeah , but then you 're effectively using the resources of the back - up system . phd i: Yeah , just give a dedi grad f: It we already have it there and it it 's phd i: Well , I 'm saying is @ @ i if you go to Dave , and and and ask him " can I use your tape robot ? " , he will say , " well that 's gonna screw up our back - up operation . He 'll say " if if that means that it 's not gonna be backed - up standardly , great . phd g: What about if the times overlap with the normal back - up time ? grad f: it 's it 's just it 's just a utility which queues up . grad f: And then you can tell it to then remove it from the disk or you can , you know , do it a a few days later or whatever you wanna do , after you confirm that it 's really backed - up . grad f: NW ? postdoc a: You saying NW archive ? grad f: NW archive . postdoc a: Yep And if you did that during the day it would never make it to the nightly back - ups . phd i: Well , it if he you have to put the data on a on a non - backed - up disk to begin with . postdoc a: Well , but you can have it NW archive to you can have , a non - backed - up disk NW archived , grad f: Right . phd i: So that so that otherwise you don't you postdoc a: and it 'll never show up on the nightly back - ups . grad f: So , that means we 'll probably wanna convert all all those files filesystems to non - backed - up media . professor d: another , thing on the agenda said SRI recognition experiments ? What 's that ? phd i: SRI recognition ? Oh . Chuck , do you have any any updates ? phd b: N I 'm successfully , increasing the error rate . So ,  I 'm just playing with , the number of Gaussians that we use in the the recognizer , and phd i: Well , you have to sa you have to tell people that you 're you 're doing you 're trying the tandem features . It sai because  , the meeting before , you said " OK , we got it down to where they 're they 're within a tenth of a percent " . phd i: So so , when So I I had I ha grad f: That was a quick response . phd i: So , we had reached the point where phd g: I 'm well rehearsed . phd i: we had reached the point where , on the male portion of the development set , the ,  or one of the development sets , I should say the ,  the male error rate with , ICSI PLP features was pretty much identical with , SRI features . phd i: So , phd g: Is there less training data ? phd i:  phd g: we don phd i: No , actually there 's more training data . So ,  so then  Oh , and plus the the vocal tract length normalization didn't actually made things worse . phd i: So So professor d: So but you see , now , between between the males and the females , there 's certainly a much bigger difference in the scaling range , than there is , say , just within the males . And what you were using before was scaling factors that were just from the the m the SRI front - end . professor d: but now you 're looking over a larger range and it may not be so fine . phd i: Well ,  So I just d so the one thing that I then tried was to put in the low - pass filter , which we have in the So , most most Hub - five systems actually band - limit the  , at about , thirty - seven hundred , hertz . So ,  And I 'm now , trying the Oh , and suddenly , also the v the vocal tract length normalization only in the test se on the test data . So , you can do vocal tract length normalization on the test data only or on both the training and the test . phd i: And you expect it to help a little bit if you do it only on the test , and s more if you do it on both training and test . phd i: And so the It now helps , if you do it only on the test , and I 'm currently retraining another set of models where it 's both in the training and the test , and then we 'll we 'll have , hopefully , even better results . So But there 's It looks like there will still be some difference , maybe between one and two percent , for the females . phd i: And it is true that the ,  that the you know , we are using the But it can't be just the VTL , professor d:  - huh . phd i: because if you don't do VTL in both systems , you know , the the females are considerably worse in the with the PLP features . phd g: Well , what 's the standard ? Yeah , so I thought the performance was actually a little better on females than males . phd i: that ye overall , yes , but on this particular development test set , they 're actually a little worse . We 're looking at the discrepancy between the SRI system and the SRI system when trained with ICSI features . I 'm just wondering if that if if you have any indication of your standard features , grad f: What 's Are the freq ? phd g: you know , if that 's also different or in the same direction or not . professor d: You 're This is lemme ask a q more basic que phd g: Cuz professor d: is this , iterative , Baum - Welch training ? phd i:   professor d: Or is it Viterbi training ? Or ? phd i: It 's Baum - Welch training . And how do you determine when to to stop iterating ? phd i:  Well , actually , we we just basically do a s a fixed number of iterations .  , which Eh , we used to do only three , and then we found out we can squeeze And it was basically , we 're s we 're keeping it on the safe side . It might be that one more iteration would would help , but it 's sort of professor d: Or maybe or maybe you 're doing one too many . professor d:  it 's it 's phd i: No , but with Baum - Welch , there shouldn't be an over - fitting issue , really . grad f: Well , you can try each one on a cross - validation set , phd i:  . professor d: It d if you if you remember some years ago Bill Byrne did a thing where he was he was looking at that , grad f: can't you ? professor d: and he showed that you could get it . We can Well , that 's that 's the easy one to check , professor d: Yeah . phd i: because we save all the intermediate models grad f: Do you ? phd i: and we can professor d: And in each case , ho grad f: What ? professor d: I 'm sorry in each case how do you determine , you know , the the usual fudge factors ? The ,  the , language , scaling , acoustic scaling ,  phd i:  I  I 'm actually re - optimizing them . And the pru the question he was asking at one point about pruning ,  Remember that one ? phd i: Pruning ? professor d: Well , he was he 's it looked like the probabil at one point he was looking at the probabilities he was getting out at the likelihoods he was getting out of PLP versus mel cepstrum , and they looked pretty different , phd i: Pruning in the ? phd b: Yeah , the likelihoods were lower for the PLP . professor d: And so , there 's the question phd i: I you mean did you see this in the SRI system ? phd b:   Well , the likelihoods are phd b: and phd i: You can't directly compare them , because , for every set of models you compute a new normalization . professor d: But , still it 's a question phd i: So professor d: if you have some threshold somewhere in terms of beam search or something , phd b: Well , yeah .   phd b: if you have one threshold that works well because the range of your likelihoods is in this area phd i: We prune very conservatively .  , as we saw with the meeting data ,  we could probably tighten the pruning without really So we we basically we have a very open beam . professor d: Right ? Here we 're - we 're saying that we there gee , there 's this b eh , there 's this difference here . Right ? But but but but , let 's suppose just for a second that , we 've sort of taken out a lot of the the major differences , between the two . professor d: we 're already sort of using the mel scale and we 're using the same style filter integration , and and , well , we 're making sure that low and high phd i: Actually , there is the difference in that . grad f: And what 's the top frequency of each ? phd i: Well , now it 's the same . But professor d: Before we i i th with straight PLP , it 's trapezoidal also . phd i: Well But professor d: But then we had a slight difference in the in the scale . phd i: Since currently the Feacalc program doesn't allow me to change the filter shape independently of the scale . phd i: And , I did the experiment on the SRI front - end where I tried the y where the standard used to be to use trapezoidal filters . So , it 's not I don't think the filter shape by itself will make a huge difference . professor d: So , f i We 've always viewed it , anyway , as the major difference between the two , is actually in the smoothing , that the that the , PLP , and and the reason PLP has been advantageous in , slightly noisy situations is because , PLP does the smoothing at the end by an auto - regressive model , phd i:   So one thing I haven't done yet is to actually do all of this with a much larger with our full training set . So right now , we 're using a I don't know , forty ? I i it 's it 's eh it 's a f training set that 's about , you know , by a factor of four smaller than what we use when we train the full system . phd i: And the Baum - Welch should be much less of a factor , if you go full whole hog . phd i: And so , w so , just  so the strategy is to first sort of treat things with fast turn - around on a smaller training set and then , when you 've sort of , narrowed it down , you try it on a larger training set . professor d: Now the other que related question , though , is is , what 's the boot models for these things ? phd i: Th - th the boot models are trained from scratch . So we compute ,  So , we start with a , alil alignment that we computed with the b sort of the best system we have . So we com we do a , you know , w  We collect the  , the observations from those alignments under each of the feature sets that that we train . And then , from there we do ,  There 's a lot of , actually The way it works , you first train a phonetically - tied mixture model . And then from that you you do the you you go to a state - clustered model , professor d: Yeah . This it migh Th - the thought is is is possible another possible partial cause is if the boot models used a comple used a different feature set , that phd i:   phd i: Yeah , but professor d: you know , they they will find boundaries a little differently , though You know , all th all that sort of thing is actually slightly different . I 'd expect it to be a minor effect , phd i: But but but , what I 'm what I 'm saying is professor d: but phd i: So , we e w f w For a long time we had used boot alignments that had been trained with a with the same front - end but with acoustic models that were , like , fifteen percent worse than what we use now . phd i: And with a dict different dictionary with a considerably different dictionary , which was much less detailed and much less well - suited . phd i: And so , then we switched to new boot alignments , which which now had the benefit of all these improvements that we 've made over two years in the system . phd i: So , what I 'm saying is , the exact nature of these boot alignments is probably not a big factor in the quality of the final models . But it it I st still see it as  , there 's there 's a history to this , too , phd i: Yeah . professor d: but but I I I th I think it could be the things that it the data is being viewed in a certain way , that a beginning is here rather than there and so forth , phd i: Yeah . Anyway , I I I should really reserve , any conclusions until we 've done it on the large training set , and until we 've seen the results with the with the VTL in training . At some point you also might wanna take the same thing and try it on , some Broadcast News data or something else that actually has has some noisy noisy components , so we can see if any conclusions we come to holds across different data . grad h:  ! professor d: So , is there something quick about Absinthe that you ? phd i: With this said . Just what we were talking about before , which is that I ported a Blass library to Absinthe , and then got got it working with fast - forward , and got a speedup roughly proportional to the number of processors times the clock cycle . grad f: I 'm in the process of doing it for Quicknet , but there 's something going wrong and it 's about half the speed that I was estimating it should be , and I 'm not sure why . But the what it means is that it 's likely that for net training and forward passes , we 'll Absinthe will be a good machine . phd i: A few more processors ? How many are you shooting for ? grad f: There 're five now . grad f: And it 's also five - fifty megahertz and you can get a gigahertz . phd i: Can you mix t  , processors of different speed ? grad f: I don't think so . grad f: We 'd have to get a almost certainly have to get a , Netfinity server . And , so , these are the demos for the  , July , meeting and ,  DARPA mee grad f: July what ? Early July ? Late July ? professor d: Oh , I think it 's July fifteenth . So , we talked about getting something together for that , but maybe ,  maybe we 'll just put that off for now , given that But I think maybe we should have a a sub - meeting , I think , probably , Adam and and , Chuck and me should talk about should get together and talk about that sometime soon . Gets our grad f: Which is gonna be a little hard for a couple people because we have different digits forms . So , the idea is just to read each line with a short pause between lines , grad c: Alright . grad f: not between And , since we 're in a hurry , we were just gonna read everyone all at once
phd e: What am I ? professor f: Little low ? phd e: Channel four ? professor f: Channel five . phd g: The gai the gain 's up at it what it usually is , professor f: Is it ? phd g: but if you think it 's Yeah . phd d: I think phd g: She can just walk in , I guess , or phd d: Yeah . I was gonna ask Adam to , say if he thought anymore about the demo stuff because it occurred to me that this is late May and the DARPA meeting is in mid July .  , but I don't remember w what we I know that we were gonna do something with the transcriber interface is one thing , but I thought there was a second thing . Anybody remember ? phd g: Well , we were gonna do a mock - up , like , question answering or something , I thought , that was totally separate from the interface . Do you remember ? Remember , like , asking questions and retrieving , but in a pre - stored fashion . phd g: That was the thing we talked about , I think , before the transcriber professor f: Yeah . So anyway , you have to sort out that out and get somebody going on it cuz we 're got a got a month left basically . phd g: I was writing the digits and then I realized I could xerox them , professor f: Oh , oh . professor f: So , the choice is , which which do we want more , the the the comparison , of everybody saying them at the same time or the comparison of people saying the same digits at different times that ? phd g: It 's just cuz I didn't have any more digit sheets .  , we could use them for normalizing or something , but it of course goes more quickly doing them in unison . phd e: But anyway , they won't be identical as somebody is saying zero in some sometimes , you know , saying O , and so , it 's not i not identical .  ju what what might those be ? phd d: IBM stuff and , just getting  , meeting information organized . phd c: Are you implying that it 's currently disorganized ? phd d: In my mind . professor f: Is there stuff that 's happened about , the SRI recognizer et cetera , tho those things that were happening before with ? phd c: Well . professor f: Y y you guys were doing a bunch of experiments with different front - ends and then with Is is that still sort of where it was , the other day ? phd c: We 're improving . phd d: Now the the You saw the note that the PLP now is getting basically the same as the MFCC .  , it seems It looks l I haven't The It 's The experiment is still not complete , but , it looks like the vocal tract length normalization is working beautifully , actually , w using the warp factors that we computed for the SRI system and just applying them to the ICSI front - end . phd c: Just had to take the reciprocal of the number because they have different meanings in the two systems .  phd c: But one issue actually that just came up in discussion with Liz and and Don was , as far as meeting recognition is concerned , we would really like to , move , to , doing the recognition on automatic segmentations . phd c: Because in all our previous experiments , we had the  , you know , we were essentially cheating by having the , you know , the h the hand - segmentations as the basis of the recognition . phd c: And so now with Thilo 's segmenter working so well , I think we should consider doing a phd e: Mmm . phd g: And even The good thing is that since you , have high recall , even if you have low precision cuz you 're over - generating , that 's good because we could train noise models in the recognizer for these kinds of , transients and things that come from the microphones , phd c: Right . phd g: but I know that if we run recognition unconstrained on a whole waveform , we do very poorly because we 're we 're getting insertions in places what that you may well be cutting out . phd c: We should we should consider doing some extra things , like , you know , retraining or adapting the the models for background noise to the to this environment , for instance . phd g: And , yeah , using Thilo 's , you know , posteriors or some kind of or phd c: So . So , talked with Brian and gave him the alternatives to the single beep at the end of each utterance that we had generated before . And so he talked it over with the transcriber and the transcriber thought that the easiest thing for them would be if there was a beep and then the nu a number , a digit , and then a beep , at the beginning of each one professor f: Yeah . And , so Adam wrote a little script to generate those style , beeps phd c: Where 'd you get the digits from ? phd d: and so we 're I came up here and just recorded the numbers one through ten . phd c: And do you splice them into the waveform ? Or ? phd d: Yeah . He then he d I recorded Actually , I recorded one through ten three times at three different speeds and then he picked . phd d: He liked the fastest one , so he just cut those out and spliced them in between , two beeps . phd d: Does it ? phd e: It will be funny when you 're really reading digits , and then there are the chunks with with your digits in ? phd d: Yeah . postdoc a: Now actually , phd d: That 'll throw them , postdoc a: we 're Are we handling ? phd d: huh ? professor f: maybe we should have you record A , B , C for those or something . And she said it wasn't gonna the transcriber said it wouldn't be a problem cuz they can actually make a template , that has beep , number , beep . phd d: So , we We 're gonna send them one more sample meeting , and Thilo has run his segmentation . And when we get that back we 'll see if that sort of fixes the problem we had with , too many beeps in the last transcription . Do w do what Do you have any idea of the turn - around on on those steps you just said ? phd g: Great . professor f: e e u u The reason I 'm asking is because , Jane and I have just been talking , and she 's just been doing . professor f: And so we don't sort of really know exactly what they 'll be doing , how long they 'll be doing it , and so forth , because right now she has no choice but to operate in the mode that we already have working . professor f: And , so it 'd be It 'd be good to sort of get that resolved , soon as we could , phd d: Yeah . I Yeah , I I hope @ @ we can get a better estimate from this one that we send them .   in particular I would I would really hope that when we do this DARPA meeting in July that we sort of have we 're we 're into production mode , somehow phd d:   professor f: You know , that we we actually have a stream going and we know how how well it does and how and how it operates . Maybe before we do the meeting info organize thing , maybe you could say relevant stuff about where we are in transcriptions . So , we  , the transcribers have continued to work past what I 'm calling " set one " , which was the s the set that I 've been ,  OK , talking about up to this point , but , they 've gotten five meetings done in that set . I 'm thinking of hiring another one , which will because we 've had a lot of attrition . And that will bring our total to professor f: They die off after they do this for a while .  , you know , one of them really w wasn't planning phd c: Oh , that was an unfor unforeseen side effect of postdoc a: Eh , one of them , had never planned to work past January .  , it 's th all these various things , cuz we , you know , we presented it as possibly a month project back in January and and and and  , so it makes sense .  , through attrition we we 've we 're down to to two , but they 're really solid . We had a good core phd g: Well , they won't hear this since they 're going .  , I d it 's just a matter of we w we 're we 've got , professor f: No backs . postdoc a: two of the ones who who , ha had been putting in a lot of hours up to this point and they 're continuing to put in a a lot of hours , which is wonderful , and excellent work . And so , then , in addition , I hired two more today and I 'm planning to h hire a third one with this within this coming week , but but the plan is just as , Morgan was saying we discussed this , and the plan right now is to keep the staff on the on the leaner side , you know , rather than hiring , like , eight to ten right now , professor f:   postdoc a: because if the IBM thing comes through really quickly , then , we wouldn't wanna have to , you know , lay people off and stuff . And this way it 'll  , I got really a lot of response for for my notice and I think I could hire additional people if I wish to . An - and the other thing is , in the unlikely event and since we 're so far from this , it 's a little hard to plan this way in the unlikely event that we actually find that we have , transcribers on staff who are twiddling their thumbs because , you know , there 's , you know , all the stuff that that was sitting there has been transcribed and they 're and they 're faster the the pipeline is faster than  , than the generation , eh , i in in the day e event that that day actually dawns , I I bet we could find some other stuff for them to do . professor f: So I I think that , eh , eh , a as we were talking , if we if we hire twelve , then we could , you know , run into a problem later . But but ,  for all sorts of reasons but if we hire f you know , f we have five on staff five or six on staff at any given time , then it 's a small enough number so we can be flexible either way . phd g: It 'd be great , too , if , we can we might need some help again getting the tighter boundaries or some hand to experiment with ,  you know , to have a ground truth for this segmentation work , which I guess you have some already that was really helpful , and we could probably use more . That was a thing I I planned working on , is , to use the the transcriptions which are done by now , and to to use them as ,  phd g: Oh . To to create some speech - nonspeech labels out of them , and Yeah , but that that 's a thing w was w what I 'm just looking into . postdoc a: The the the pre - segmentations are so much are s so extremely helpful . Now there was , I g guess So , a couple weeks ago I needed some new ones and it happened to be during the time that he was on vacation f for just very few days you were away . postdoc a: so I so I started them on the non - pre - segmented and then switched them over to yours and , they ,  you know , they always appreciate that when they have that available . postdoc a: And and and she was And so , I asked her  , They 're very perceptive . I haven't done it yet , but I wanna do that and she 's out of town , for a couple of weeks , but I wanna do that when she returns .  , cuz she was saying , you know , in a in a span of very short period we asked It seems like the ones that need to be adjusted are these these these things , and she was saying the short utterances , the ,  phd g:  . But but actually i it 's so correct for so much of the time , that it 's an enormous time saver phd e: Yeah . phd g: Is there actually a record of where they change ?  , you can compare , do a diff on the just so that we knew postdoc a: You could do it . It 's it 's complicated in that  , hhh , i hhh , i phd e: Yeah . Actually , when when they create new yeah , new segments or something , it will be , not that easy but  . phd g: just so that if we run it we know whether we 're which ones were cheating phd e: Yeah . phd g: and postdoc a: There is a there is one problem with that and that is when they start part way through then what I do is I merge what they 've done with the pre - segmented version . Wha - what you 'd really like is that they started with pre - segmented and were pre - segmented all the way through . postdoc a: And ,  @ @ I ,  the it wasn't possible for about four of the recent ones . As long as we have a record , I guess , of the original automatic one , we can always find out how well we would do fr from the recognition side by using those boundaries . phd g: Also if you need someone to record this meeting , I 'm happy to for the transcribers I could do it , or Chuck or Adam . So , Jane and Adam and I had a meeting where we talked about the reorganization of the directory structure for all of the meeting professor f: Did you record it ? phd d: No . And then , Jane also s prepared a  , started getting all of the the meetings organized , so she prepared a a spreadsheet , which I spent the last couple of days adding to . So I went through all of the data that we have collected so far , and have been putting it into , a spreadsheet with start time , the date , the old meeting name , the new meeting name , the number of speakers , the duration of the meeting , comments , you know , what its transcription status is , all that kind of stuff . And so , the idea is that we can take this and then export it as HTML and put it on the Meeting Recorder web page so we can keep people updated about what 's going on . phd d: I 've gotta get some more information from Jane cuz I have some some gaps here that I need to get her to fill in , but so far , as of Monday , the fourteenth , we 've had a total number of meeting sixty - two hours of meetings that we have collected .  , and I 'm gonna have on here the total amount that 's been transcribed so far , but I 've got a bunch of  , that 's what I have to talk to Jane about , figuring out exactly which ones have have been completed and so forth . But , this 'll be a nice thing that we can put up on the the web site and people can be informed of the status of various different ones . And it 'll also list , like under the status , if it 's at IBM or if it 's at ICSI , or if it 's completed or which ones we 're excluding and and there 's a place for comments , so we can , say why we 're excluding things and so forth . professor f: Now would the ones that , are already transcribed we h we have enough there that c you know , we 've already done some studies and so forth and  , shouldn't we go through and do the business - es u of of having the , participants approve it , for approve the transcriptions for distribution and so forth ? postdoc a: interesting idea . In principle , I I would say yes , although I still am doing some the final - pass editing , trying to convert it over to the master file as the being the channelized version and it 's Yeah , it seems like I get into that a certain way and then something else intervenes and I have to stop . Cleaning up the things like the , places where the transcriber was uncertain , and and doing spot - checking here and there . So , I guess it would make sense to wait until th that 's done , but but professor f: Well , le let me put in another sort of a milestone kind of as as I did with the ,  the the pipeline . professor f: we are gonna have this DARPA meeting in the middle of July , postdoc a: Yes . professor f: and I think it w it 'd be given that we 've been we 've given a couple public talks about it already , spaced by months and months , I think it 'd be pretty bad if we continued to say none of this is available . So we can s we we wanna be able to say " here is a subset that is available right now " postdoc a:   phd c: And they don't have to approve , you know , th an edited version , they can just give their approval to whatever version postdoc a: Well , maybe professor f: Well , in principle , yes . But , i if if if somebody actually did get into some legal issue with it then we phd c: Bu Yeah . Presumably if if s errors are found , they will be fixed , but they won't change the the content of the meetings . phd g: Well , i if Jane is clarifying question question , then , you know , how can they agree to it before they know her final version ? postdoc a: The other thing , too , is there can be subtleties where a person uses this word instead of that word , which @ @ could 've been transcribed in the other way . phd g: Thing postdoc a: And no and they wouldn't have been slanderous if it had been this other word . You know ? professor f: I it you know , there there is a point at which I agree it becomes ridiculous because , you know , you could do this final thing and then a year from now somebody could say , you know , that should be a period and not a question mark . Right ? And you don't you there 's no way that we 're gonna go back and ask everybody " do you approve this , you know this document now ? " So So I think what it is is that the the the the thing that they sign I I haven't looked at it in a while , but it has to be open enough that it sort of says " OK , from now on you know , now that I 've read this , you can use do anything you want with these data . professor f: And ,  But , i I think we wanna So , assuming that it 's in that kind of wording , which I don't remember , I think i we just wanna have enough confidence ourselves that it 's so close to the final form it 's gonna be in , a year from now that they 're postdoc a:   It 's just , a question of , if if the person is using the transcript as the way of them judging what they said and whether it was slanderous , then it seems like it 's it 's i it needs to be more correct than if we could count on them re - listening to the meeting . postdoc a: Because it becomes , eh , in a way a a f  , a legal document i if they 've agreed to that . I forget how we ended up on this , but I remember my taking the position of not making it so so easy for everybody to observe everything and Adam was taking the position of of having it be really straightforward for people to check every aspect of it including the audio . And I don't remember who won , Adam or me , but postdoc a: Well , if it 's only the transcript , though  , th this this is my point , that that professor f: the  , that that 's why I 'm bringing this up again , because I can't remember how we ended up . postdoc a: then it becomes professor f: That it was the transcrip He wanted to do a web interface that would make it postdoc a: Well , if it 's just the audio Well . phd g: with the web interface it 's interesting , because you could allow the person who signs to be informed when their transcript changes , or something like that . Like , I don't wanna know , but some people might be really interested and then y In other words , they would be informed if there was some significant change other than typos and things like that . professor f: You decided you were whispering Satanic incantations under your breath when you were phd g: Well , I don't know what happened to the small heads thing , but I j  , I 'm just saying that , like , you know , you can sort of say that any things that are deemed professor f: They disappeared from view .  , I agree that at some point people probably won't care about typos but they would care about significant meaning changes and then they could be asked for their consent , I guess , if if those change . Cuz assumi assuming we we don't really distribute things that have any significant changes from what they sign anyway . phd c: Tha That 's How about having them approve the audio and not the transcripts ? phd g: Oh , my God . grad b: That 's phd c: We just have to give them a chance to listen to it , and if they don't , that 's their problem . phd g: You you d That 's like postdoc a: Unfortunately , in in the sign thing that they signed , it says " transcripts " . postdoc a: " You 'll be you 'll be provided the transcripts when they 're available . phd g: that 's a lot to ask for people that have been in a lot of meetings . professor f: W anyway , haven't we we 've gone down this path a number of times . I know this can lead to extended conversations and and not really get anywhere , so let let me just suggest that  , off - line that , the people involved figure it out and take care of it before it 's July . So so that in July we can tell people " yes , we have this and you can use it " . phd g: it 's I guess one thing we 're learning is that the amount We have eight meetings there because we couldn't use the non - native all non - native meetings and it 's , well , probably below threshold on enough data for us for the things we 're looking at because the prosodic features are very noisy and so you you need a lot of data in order to model them .  , so we 're starting to see some patterns and we 're hoping that maybe with , I don't know , double or triple the data with twenty meetings or so , that we would start to get better results . But we did find that some of the features that , I gue Jane would know about , that are expressing sort of the distance of , boundaries from peaks in the utterance and some local , range pitch range effects , like how close people are to their floor , are showing up in these classifiers , which are also being given some word features that are cheating , cuz they 're true words . Right ? phd g: spurts is not cheating except that of course you know the real words , grad b: Right . phd c: No phd g: Not exactly , but i grad b: But ra somewhat ? professor f: On the average . Well , we don't know and actually that 's one of the things we 're interested in doing , is a sort of professor f:  - huh . phd c: Have you tried using just time , as opposed to number of words ? phd g: So . grad b: I think ti  Just p time position , like when the word starts ? phd c: Yeah . grad b: I don't know if that was in the phd c: Well , no ,  t time time position relative to the beginning of the spurt . phd g: we didn't try it , but it 's s grad b: Like , there 's a lot of different features you could just pull out . professor f: How about time position normalized by speak phd g: And it depends on speaking rate professor f: Yeah . phd g: But we one of the interesting things was I guess you reported on some te punctuation type grad b: Yeah . phd g: finding sentence boundaries , finding disfluency boundaries , and then I had done some work on finding from the foreground speech whether or not someone was likely to interrupt , so where you know , if I 'm talking now and someone and and Andreas is about to interrupt me , is he gonna choose a certain place in my speech , either prosodically or word - based . And there the prosodic features actually showed up and a neat thing even though the word features were available . And a neat thing there too is I tried some putting the speaker So , I gave everybody a short version of their name . So that means that overall , it wasn't just modeling Morgan , or it wasn't just modeling a single person , professor f:   phd g: but was sort of trying to , get a general idea the model the tree classifier was trying to find general locations that were applicable to different speakers , even though there are huge speaker effects . The but the main limitation now is I because we 're only looking at things that happen every ten words or every twenty words , we need more more data and more data per speaker . It 'd also be interesting to look at the EDU meetings because we did include meeting type as a feature , so whether you were in a r Meeting Recorder meeting or a Robustness meeting did matter to interrupts because there are just fewer interrupts in the Robustness meetings . phd g: And so the classifier learns more about Morgan than it does about sort of the average person , professor f:   phd g: So it 's And I think Don ,  Well , we have a long list of things he 's starting to look at now over the summer , where we can And he 'll be able to report on more things in the future . But it was great that we could at least go from the you know , Jane 's transcripts and the , recognizer output and get it to this point . And I think it 's something Mari can probably use in her preliminary report like , " yeah , we 're at the point where we 're training these classifiers and we 're just reporting very preliminary but suggestive results that some features , both word and pro prosodic , work . " The other thing that was interesting to me is that the pitch features are better than in Switchboard . And I think that really is from the close - talking mikes , cuz the pitch processing that was done has much cleaner behavior than than the Switchboard telephone bandwidth . Well , first of all , the pitch tracks are m have less , halvings and doublings than than Switchboard and there 's a lot less dropout , so if you ask how many regions where you would normally expect some vowels to be occurring are completely devoid of pitch information , professor f:    phd g: in other words the pitch tracker just didn't get a high enough probability of voicing for words for for , you know , five word professor f:  . So the missing We had a big missing data problem in Switchboard and , so the features weren't as reliable cuz they were often just not available . phd d: Could it have to do with the the lower frequency cut - off on the Switchboard ? phd g: So that 's actually good .  , the tele we had telephone bandwidth for Switchboard and we had the an annoying sort of telephone handset movement problem that I think may also affect it . phd g: Anyway , Don 's been doing a great job and we hope to continue with , Andreas 's help and also some of Thilo 's help on this , professor f: Great . phd e: Y phd g: to to try to get a non - cheating version of how all this would work . professor f: Has has ,  ? We just I think , just talked about this the other day , but h has has anybody had a chance to try changing , insertion penalty sort of things with the with the , using the tandem system input for the ? phd c: Oh , yeah . phd c: There were a little the relative number of I think there were a higher number of deletions , actually . phd c: So , you ,  So , actually it it preferred to have a positive er , negative insertion penalty , phd g: Deletions ? phd c: which means that ,  professor f:  - huh . phd c: But , you know , it didn't change th the by adjusting that the ,  professor f: OK . But , you know , given that that word error rate is so high , that 's not a professor f: OK . phd c: But , we s just ,  you know , Chuck and I talked and the @ @ next thing to do is probably to tune the  , the size of the Gaussian system , @ @ to to this to this feature vector , which we haven't done at all . phd c: And , for instance , Dan @ @ Dan just sent me a message saying that CMU used , something like ten Gaussians per cluster You know , each each mixture has ten Gaussians phd d:   We 're using sixty - four , phd c: and and we 're using sixty - four , phd d: right ? phd c: so that 's obviously a big difference phd d: Yeah . phd c: and it might be way off and give very poorly trained , you know , Gaussians that way , professor f:  . So so , we have The turn - around time on the training when we train only the a male system with , you know , our small training set , is less than twenty - four hours , so we can run lots of  , basically just brute force , try a whole bunch of different  , settings . professor f: huh ? phd c: But the PLP features work  , you know , continue to improve the , professor f: OK . phd c:  As I said before , the  using Dan 's , vocal tract normalization option works very well . So , @ @ I ran one experiment where we 're just did the vocal tract le normalization only in the test data , professor f:   phd c: so I didn't bother to retrain the models at all , and it improved by one percent , which is about what we get with  , with , you know , just @ @ actually doing both training and test normalization , with , the , with the standard system . So , in a few hours we 'll have the numbers for the for retraining everything with vocal tract length normalization and So , that might even improve it further . phd c: So , it looks like the P L - fea P features do very well now with after having figured out all these little tricks to to get it to work . So you mean you improve one percent over a system that doesn't have any V T L in it already ? phd c: Exactly . And and what that suggests also is of course that the current Switchboard MLP isn't trained on very good features . phd c: because it was trained on whatever , you know , was used , last time you did Hub - five stuff , which didn't have any of the professor f: Right . professor f: Right ?  , y the phd c: Well , but if you add them all up you have , almost five percent difference now . phd c: actually , and it 's , What 's actually qu interesting is that with  , well , you m prob maybe another half percent if you do the VTL in training , and then interestingly , if you optimize you get more of a win out of rescoring the , the N best lists , and optimizing the weights ,  than phd d: Than you do with the standard ? phd c: Yeah . But the part that 's actually adjustment of the front - end per se as opposed to doing putting VTLN in or something is it was a couple percent . professor f: Right ? It was it was there was there was one thing that was one and a half percent and one that was point eight . One of them was , the change to ,  because it did it all at once , to  , from bark scale to mel scale , phd c:   professor f: which I really feel like saying in quotes , because @ @ they 're essentially the same scale but the but but but any i individual particular implementation of those things puts things in a particular place . professor f: So that 's why I wanted to look I still haven't looked at it yet . professor f: and it it 's probably something like there 's one fewer or one more filter in the sub one kilohertz band phd c:   professor f: it could be there 's something more fundamental but it you know , I I don't know it yet . And the other and the other that was like one and a half or something , and then there was point eight percent , which was what was the other thing ? phd d: Well , that was combined with the triangular . professor f: We d weren't able to separate them out cuz it was just done in one thing . So that was that was ,  that one I can claim credit for , i in terms of screwing it up in the first place . So that someone e until someone else fixed it , which is that , I never put when I u We had some problems before with offsets . professor f: So we we had ,  ea everybody else who was doing Wall Street Journal knew that there were big DC offsets in th in these data in those data and and and nobody happened to mention it to us , phd c:  . professor f: and we were getting these , like , really terrible results , like two , three times the error everybody else was getting . And then in casual conversation someone ment mentioned "  , well , I guess , you know , of course you 're taking care of the offsets . professor f: And at that point , you know , we were pretty new to the data and we 'd never really , like , looked at it on a screen and then when we just put it on the screen and wroop ! phd c:   So , in PLP phd g: There was a like a hum or some or when they recorded it ? professor f: No . It 's just , it it 's it 's not at all uncommon for for recorded electronics to have different , DC offsets . It 's you know , you could have ten , twenty , maybe thirty millivolts , whatever , and it 's consistently in there . The thing is , most people 's front - ends have pre - emphasis with it , with zero at zero frequency , so that it 's irrelevant . We had we had the equivalent of pre - emphasis in a a , Fletcher - Munson style weighting that occurs in the middle of P L but it doesn't actually have a zero at zero frequency , phd g:  . So at that point I reali " oh sh we better have a have a high - pass filter " just , you know just take care of the problem . So I put in a high - pass filter at , I think ninety ninety hertz or so  , for a sixteen kilohertz sampling rate . And so well , so , you know , the code doesn't know anything about that and so this is all at eight kilohertz and so it was at forty - five hertz instead of at instead of at ninety . professor f: So , I don't know if Dan fixed it or or , what he phd c: Well , he made it a parameter . Yeah , I guess if he did it right , he did fix it and then and then it 's taking care of sampling rate , which is great . phd d: What what is the parameter ? professor f: He had a phd d: Is it , just the f lower cut - off that you want ? phd c: It 's called , H - HPF . phd c: u And but HPF , you know , when you put a number after it , uses that as the hertz value of the cut - off . professor f: frankly , we never did that with the RASTA filter either , phd c:   professor f: so the RASTA filter is actually doing a different thing in the modulation spectral domain depending on what sampling rate you 're doing , which is another old old bug of mine . So that that was the problem there was th we we we had always intended to cut off below a hundred hertz phd c:   Well , but ,  Well , again , after completing the current experiments , we 'll we can add up all the  differences professor f: Oh , yeah . phd c: and and an professor f: But but , I guess my my point was that that , the hybrid system thing that we did was , primitive in many ways . professor f: And I think I agree with you that if we fixed lots of different things and they would all add up , we would probably have a a a competitive system . professor f: unless you call well , if you call VTL the front - en front - end , that 's , a little more . phd d: One experiment we should we 'll probably need to do though when  , at some point , is , since we 're using that same the net that was trained on PLP without all these things in it , for the tandem system , we may wanna go back and retrain , professor f: Right ? But . phd c: eh At this point I 'm as  , you know e I 'm wondering is it Can we expect , a tandem system to do better than a properly trained you know , a Gaussian system trained directly on the features with , you know , the right ch choice of parameters ? professor f: Well , that 's what we 're seeing in other areas . Right ? So , it 's so ,  phd d: So , we But but we may not . professor f: the reason to think it should is because you 're putting in the same information and you 're transforming it to be more discriminative . Now the thing is , in some databases I wouldn't expect it to necessarily give you much and and part of what I view as the real power of it is that it gives you a transformational capability for taking all sorts of different wild things that we do , not just th the standard front - end , but other things , like with multiple streams and so forth , phd c:   professor f: If it 's , you know , like way way worse then , you know phd c: Right . phd d: So , Morgan , an another thing that Andreas and I were talking about was , so @ @ in the first experiment that he did we just took the whole fifty - six , outputs and that 's , basically compared to a thirty - nine input feature vector from either MFCC or PLP . phd d: But one thing we could do is professor f: Let let me let me just ask you something . When you say take the fifty - six outputs , these are the pre final nonlinearity outputs phd d: Yeah . And so so then you u Do you use all fifty - six of the KLT phd d: That 's what we did . professor f: or ? phd d: Right ? So one thing we were wondering is , if we did principal components and , say , took out just thirteen , and then did deltas and double - deltas on that professor f: OK . professor f:  these were all different databases and different you know , in HTK and all that , phd d: Yeah . But my recollection of it was that it didn't make it better but it didn't make it worse . professor f: But , again , given all these differences , maybe it 's more important in your case that you not take a lot of these low - variance , components . phd d: Cuz in a sense , the net 's already got quite a bit of context in those features , professor f: Yeah . phd d: so if we did deltas and double - deltas on top of those , we 're getting sort of even more . phd c: But there the main point is that , you know , it took us a while but we have the procedure for coupling the two systems debugged now and  , there 's still conceivably some bug somewhere in the way we 're feeding the tandem features  , either generating them or feeding them to this to the SRI system , phd d:   phd c: but it 's professor f: There might be , cuz that 's a pretty big difference . phd c: I 'm actually f quite sure that the feeding the features into the system and training it up , professor f: What if ? phd c: that that I think that 's this that 's essentially the same as we use with the ce with the P L P fe features . phd c: There we could the another degree of freedom is how do you generate the K L T transform ? phd d:   professor f: These nets are trained with particular normalization and when that gets screwed up it it can really hurt it . phd d: I 'm doing what Eric E Eric coached me through then that part of it , so I 'm pretty confident in that . phd d: the only slight difference is that I use normalization values that , Andreas calculated from the original PLP , phd c: Right . So , I u I do Oh , we actually don't do that normalization for the PLP , do we ? For the st just the straight PLP features ? phd c: No . Well , you might e e phd c: So , there 's there is there is room for bugs that we might not have discovered , phd d: So that 's that 's another Yeah . I I would actually double check with Stephane at this point , phd c: but professor f: cuz he 's probably the one here  , he and Dan are the ones who are at this point most experienced with the tandem phd d:   professor f: thing and there may there may be some little bit here and there that is not not being handled right .  , you can't just , like , print the the values out in ASCII and , you know , look at them , see if they 're professor f: Not unless you had a lot of time phd g: Well professor f: and phd g: eh , and also they 're not  , as I understand it , you you don't have a way to optimize the features for the final word error . phd g: these are just discriminative , but they 're not , optimized for the final phd c: They 're optimized for phone discrimination , not for phd g: Right . So it there 's always this question of whether you might do better with those features if there was a way to train it for the word error metric that you 're actually that you 're actually professor f: That 's right . It 's indirect , so you don't know professor f: So wha w what an and you may not be in this case , come to think of it , because , you 're just taking something that 's trained up elsewhere . So in fact you the the net is trained on , a , Viterbi alignment of the training data that comes from your full system . And so that 's where the feedback comes all around , so that it is actually discriminant . You can prove that it 's it 's a ,  If you believe in the Viterbi assumption that , getting the best path , is almost equivalent to getting the best , total probability , then you actually do improve that by ,  by training up on local local ,  local frames . But , we aren't actually doing that here , because we did we did that for a hybrid system , and now we 're plugging it into another system and so it isn't i i i it wouldn't quite apply here . phd c: Do y phd d: So another huge experiment we could do would be to take the tandem features , do SRI forced alignments using those features , and then re - do the net with those . Another thing is since you 're not using the net for recognition per se but just for this transformation , it 's probably bigger than it needs to be . So , you 're using a l a long a larger phone set than what phd d: Mmm . professor f: The other thing , just to mention that Stephane this was an innovation of Stephane 's , which was a pretty neat one , and might particularly apply here , given all these things we 're mentioning . Even the local ones , given , you know , these potential outer loops which , you know , you can convince yourself turn into the global ones .  , when something about the test set is different enough from the training set that that , the discrimination that you 're learning is is is not a good one . professor f: So , his idea was to take as the input feature vector to the , Gaussian mixture system , a concatenation of the neural net outputs and the regular features . No , but we we when when we when I first started corresponding with Dan about how to go about this , I think that was one of the things that we definitely went there .  , I 'm sure that Stephane wasn't the first to think of it , phd c: Yeah . So that 's that that 's our current best best system in the , in the Aurora thing . phd c: And do you do a KLT transform on the con on the combined feature vector ? professor f: Yeah . phd c: Do you d you do a KLT transform on the combined feature vector ? professor f: Yeah . professor f: Well , actually , I ,  you should check with him , because he tried several different combinations . phd c: Because you end up with this huge feature vector , so that might be a problem , a unless you do some form of dimensionality reduction . So he did one where he put o put e the whole thing into one KLT , and another one , since the the PLP things are already orthogonalized , he left them alone and and just did a KLT on the on the on the net outputs phd c:   phd d: Did he did he try to ? So he always ended up with a feature vector that was twice as long as either one of the ? professor f: No . phd g: We need to close up cuz I need to save the data and , get a call . phd g: or , do them together ? professor f: I I g I think , given that we 're in a hurry for snacks , maybe we should do them together . professor f: Well , it 's it 's it 's not You know , it 's not gonna work out phd g: Adam 's not here , so he 's not here to tell me no . professor f: but we could we could just , see if we find a rhythm , you know , what phd g: Sure . professor f: O 's or zeroes , we wanna agree on that ? phd g: Maybe just whatever people would naturally do ? I don't know . professor f: Why don't we do zer i Anyone have a problem with saying zero ? Is zero OK ? phd g: No
Therefore, in accordance with Standing Order 17.22, I call for nominations for a temporary Chair, for the duration of the meeting. sian thomas: Any further nominations? I therefore declare that John Griffiths has been appointed temporary Chair, and I invite him to chair for the duration of today's meeting. We will move on then to item 2 on our agenda, the continuation of our inquiry into targeted funding to improve educational outcomes, and evidence session 8. Would you like to introduce yourselves for the record, please? meilyr rowlands: Meilyr Rowlands, chief inspector. If it's okay, we'll move straight into questionswe have quite a number of questions to get through this morning. I just want to start by asking about your perception of how schools are using the pupil development grant funding, and to what extent they are genuinely targeting that funding exclusively towards children eligible for free school meals. Estyn has made several reports regarding the effectiveness of the grant, and, really, going back to before this specific grant, to a similar grant, called RAISE. At the start of this grant, the funding was often spent on tackling underachievement, rather than dealing with the underachievement of children who are eligible for free school meals specifically. That's not to say that the targeting is working perfectly still, and I think that we are seeing examples where the targeting isn't going just to children who receive free school meals. In terms of what schools are doing with the grant, we have given evidence to you of the kinds of things that they are doing. They are tracking progress of pupils, they are trying to improve attendance, they are trying to work with families and the community in general, they're doing work specifically to improve howchildren are doing in exams, in key stage 4, specificallya lot of funding is being spent on thatimproving the confidence of students, taking students on extra-curricular activities, improving literacy and numeracy. llyr gruffydd am: Because the research by Ipsos MORI and the Wales Institute of Social and Economic Research, Data and Methods has shown that there is some kind of blurringI think that's the term that they usein terms of who is eligible. You referred to the fact that it is used, perhaps, to reach a slightly wider cohort than just those who are eligible for free school meals, but you do feel that that balance, from your experience, is acceptable. It was being spent on children who were underachieving, and one of the things that we did notice in the first report was that much more funding was being spent on boys than girls. And, of course, that raised the question immediately that it wasn't being spent then on children who are eligible for free school meals, because thosenumbers are equal. So, I think that schools are perhaps not following that exactly, but within the spirit of the grant, I think Im fairly comfortable. There is a specific questionI dont know if you are going to ask thisregarding more able and talented pupils. meilyr rowlands: So, if there is a cohort of pupils who are missing out on this, they are the more able and talented pupils who receive free school meals. One of them is that theres still some feeling that less able children should be receiving this grant, children who are underachieving. It seems that they are doing okay, but if they were given more support, they would do even better. llyr gruffydd am: So, is it a lack of awareness of the nature of the grant, and that the individual has to be targeted rather than just those who are underachieving? Is that the problem? Or is it the regime that focuses on exam results and the need to draw those pupils who are underachieving up, rather than incentivising those who are achievingto achieve better? meilyr rowlands: A bit of both, I'd say. I was in a conference for headteachers last week, where there was new data being discussed, and that data showed the progress of children from a certain point, year 6 tests. I think that kind of data will be very useful, because what that data can do is help secondary schools to identifymore able children and that they are underachieving. john griffiths am: Mark, did you want to pursue these matters further? mark reckless am: Yes. It was good to read in your report an increased emphasis on this and to see your awareness of its importance in the PDG as well. Can I just ask? Would you look at one area regardingschools' engagement with the Seren network, particularlyfor the more able and talented, and what more Estyn can do through its inspection criteria and otherwise to encourage this from schools? meilyr rowlands: Well, I think Estyn has always been very strongly focused on improving the performance of more able pupils. For example, in last year's annual report I raised it, and a lot of the debate around this now, I think, was generated by some of the things I've said in previous annual reports. Paul Flynn, I think, did theno, who did the report? Paul Murphy did the report. And on Seren, I'm particularly proud that my alma mater, Jesus College, is a very strong supporter of the Seren work. And we look at the performance of more able pupils in all our inspections.It's a particular partof our inspection frameworklooking at the relative performance of different groups. So, we look at the different performance of boys and girls, free school meals and non-free school meals, ethnic minorities, but we also look at the performanceof more able pupils in particular, and we question schools about how they provide for the more able pupils, and we've referred to Seren in several of our inspection reports. mark reckless am: And where schools work particularly hard to engage with Seren and take up opportunities from that and push as many pupils as appropriate to work with that, is that something that you would recognise within your inspection reports? And, on the other side, where schoolsdon't do that, is that something you wouldpull them up on? meilyr rowlands: Yes, we've done that. claire morgan: Throughout our inspections, we are looking for best practice, because part of our strategy is always to identify where there are weaknesses, but actually to point schools in the direction of where they can find a solution. llyr gruffydd am: Just briefly, you touched earlier on using the measure of those who are eligible for free school meals as a way to identify children from disadvantaged backgrounds so that you can target this funding. Do you have an opinion on whether that's the best way? meilyr rowlands: It certainly is a good way of doing it. There is a strong correlation between children who underachieve and that measure, so it is a strong measure. For example, some people say that if you have received free school meals for a period of time and now you're not receiving them, then perhaps you should still be receiving thefunding for a period of time, for example. You've reported that the proportion of schools making effectiveuse of the PDG remains around two thirds of secondary and primary schools, meaning that a third are still not using that PDG effectively. Why do you think this is? meilyr rowlands: I think that sort of proportion broadly corresponds to the schools that don't have particularly good leadership. I think, ultimately, all of these sorts of initiatives come down to strong leadership and effective leadershipthat they know how to organise and use those grants effectively. One of the shortcomings that we often identify is evaluationthat money has been spent on a particular way of using the grant, but it has not been evaluated well. michelle brown am: Are there any patterns by region or type of school in that? meilyr rowlands: I don't think there's any patterns that we've identified in terms of region. What are the most effective uses of PDG, from your point of view? Is there something in particular that you think that schools should be focusing on? meilyr rowlands: I think there's a lot of evidence on what constitutes good practice in this area. There's the Welsh Government guidance, there's our guidance, there's a lot of researchthe Sutton Trust toolkitand they're the sorts of things I mentioned earlier. So, schools do a lot of thingsthat they are in control ofthe things I mentioned earlier: things like improving attendance, offering extra-curricular activities, literacy and numeracy support, tracking pupilsall those sorts of things. But an important element of this, I think, is engaging with the learners, but also with parents and the community. I think what we've found is that the most effective schoolsthe ones that really do make a big difference to this cohort of studentsare the ones that do that most effectively. claire morgan: I think that there are different situations in different schools, but in the best schools, they evaluate the barriers to learning for their particular children. In Brackla Primary School, in Bridgend, they've got Families at Brackla, and it's a range of activities to engage with families. Families often have had a negative experience of education themselves, and the schools are trying to address some of those concerns. Cefn Hengoedin Swansea, which I'm sure many of you know about, have had an extensive strategy for engaging with the community, with the families, and equipping their children to participate in decisions around the curriculum, making them more confident learners. You've made the comment that secondary schools are focusing too much on key stage 4 and not enough on developing pupils' skills in a sustainable way. Can you expand on that and give us a bit more detail on that, please? meilyr rowlands: Yes. The latest guidance on the grant now says that 60 per cent of it should be spent on key stage 3. But what a lot of schools did with this money was precisely that, to target key stage 4to have catch-up homework clubs, revision clubs, specifically to get children better GCSE results, and getting C grades, in particular. Of course, that is an important part of your armoury of tools to use, but I think there was too much use of that. Part of the problem with that is that it doesn't either develop the long-term transferable skills that those pupils have, or should have, nor does it produce the kinds of skills that the teachers need as well. So, it's kind of a quick win, a quick-fix solution, while what we feel would be more effective in the long term, and more sustainable in the long termbecause if this money goes, then those quick fixes won't be possiblewhat would be more effective in the long term is to improve the curriculum and the pedagogy, the quality of the teaching, the quality of the curriculum, so that children are naturally enthused by what is on offer, that they attend better because they want to be in school, that they want to learn. So, we feel that getting the curriculum right, tailoring the curriculum to the needs of the pupils in that area, and improving teaching, is a more sustainable long-term solution. michelle brown am: Do you think there's anything in particular driving the focus on the key stage 4? meilyr rowlands: Well, again, I think most people would say it is the performance indicators. There was a conference of all the secondary heads in Wales, and that was one of the major discussion points in the conference: how do we get the performance indicators right so that there are no perverse incentives in it? michelle brown am: To what extent are decisions being made in schools concerning the application of the PDGactually evidence-based? To what extent are they using research to back up how they're using the PDG or is it effectively just guesswork? meilyr rowlands: I think that, of all the areas of school policy, this is the one that's most evidence-based. I think that, generally, schools can do much more about using evidence and research findings, but this particular area is probably the one that schools are strongest at using research in. That's partly because the guidance strongly suggests that you should do that, but also because there is a lot of easily accessible research evidence available. As I mentioned earlier, the Sutton Trust toolkit is a good example where researchers have really tried very hard to simplify all the evidence that exists in a way that schools can use. So, there are little pound signs to show how costly an intervention is and little stars or something to show how many months of gain pupils get out of this particular intervention. But I think what's missing is that you can't just take that evidence as it is, because you have to implement it in your own school, and that then will affect how effective that particular intervention is. Just because it is evaluated by researchers as being generally very effective doesn't mean that you will necessarily implement it effectively. There's looking at research, but there's also doing your own research and evaluating how effectivelyyou have implemented something. hefin david am: Do you think there's an attendance crisis at key stage 4 for those students eligible for free school meals? meilyr rowlands: 'Crisis' is maybe too strong a word, but I think there's been a lot of attention given to attendance, quite rightly. Over a long period of time, I was a member of thenational behaviour and attendance review board under Ken Reid about 10 years ago.So, there's been a lot of attention on attendance, and that's very important because attendance has a very strong correlation with outcomes. hefin david am: Of those students at key stage 4, 35per cent of those eligible for free school meals are attending for 95per cent of the time, whereas it's 60 per cent fortheir peers.Is the PDG making an impact on that? You've mentioned engagement with the curriculum. What more can be done? meilyr rowlands: I think what's happening now is that people are targeting their attention on attendance. It has also improved for these cohorts as well, and at a faster rate than the rest of the cohort. Nevertheless, I agree with you totally that it is a major, major problem, and that is why schoolsdo use the PDG specifically to improve attendance. meilyr rowlands: Did I say that? They are using it, and attendance has improved, and the attendance of this cohort has improved more, but there's still a major, major problem. So, I think there needs to be even more attention hefin david am: So, what? I'm looking forspecifics. What can be donewith the PDG? meilyr rowlands: I think, as I said earlier, that these are major social issues. So, I think what can be done that hasn't been done currently is to give more attention to the community-focused side of schooling. I think the schools that have done well, that have really improved attendance of this particular group of pupils, are the onesthat have taken community relationships very, very seriously and worked with parents. hefin david am: Yes, you mentioned working with families when you were answering Llyr.How does that happen, though? What does it look like? If I'm a parent, what does it look like? meilyr rowlands: Okay. Cefn Hengoed is a good example of a schoolthat has not cracked it but made a lot of progress. claire morgan: Often, in the best schools, the headteachers consider themselves to be community leaders as well as headteachers, and they often set up arrangements where they engage directly with the families of disadvantaged children or children who are underachieving generally. They try to build very strong relationships with the families so that the school is in a position to eitherliaise with different agencies or to bring agencies into the school to address some of the issues that are outside school control. hefin david am: And where does the PDG come into this, and the use of it? claire morgan: This sometimes is used for appointing staff whose role it is to facilitate these arrangements to give one-to-one support to children, to monitor attendance, to visit homes where children are not coming into schools, to try and address what the barriers are in getting them into classrooms. hefin david am: And those lessons you've learned from Cefn Hengoed: how are you going to spread that? How does that get spread? claire morgan: Well, we've done it in a number of ways. We also have conferences as well, where we invite the headteachers from those schools to come and present to other headteachers. But there's also hefin david am: This all seems like stuff that's done to teachers. Headteachers tell us that learning about best practice from other headteachers is very, very useful. When we had a conference, and when we looked at leadership and improving schools, Cefn Hengoed, along with a number of other schools, presented, and we hadvery positive feedback from that. So, it is actually schools learning from other schools, and I think the work that the consortia have been doing on school-to-school support as well can contribute to it. hefin david am: We're spreading the PDG very thinly now, if we're talking about attendance, and then we talk about exclusion as well. Is it possible that it can have an impact on reducing the higher exclusion rates for EFSM students? claire morgan: I think it has the potential to. These are often complex issues that schools are grappling with, and they are trying a variety of approaches. Some of the answers that you're givingthey seem to be giving certain examples, but there doesn't seem to be a coherence to it. Where we have very strong strategic leadership in schools, they are more direct in their approach, and they have a very strong strategy. Where there's weaker leadership, sometimes they are trying different things, perhaps in more of a scattergun approach, rather than trying strategies, evaluating and finding out what works. meilyr rowlands: I think it is true to say that it's difficult to distinguish what some of these better schools do with PDG, as opposed to their general money. Schools like Cefn Hengoed will be using more than just the PDG to do this work. hefin david am: And it appears to be a lot about the way things are done, as much as how the money is spent. You've observed that the attainment gap between pupils on free school meals and those who aren't on free school meals hasn't closed significantly at any stage of learning. Is the PDG actually working? meilyr rowlands: Well, I'm in danger of repeating myself now. So, where there have been improvements, it's quite difficult to say, 'Well, that's definitely down to the PDG', and similarly vice versa: if it's not working, it's difficult to say that it's because of PDG not being used properly.To come back to something else I said previously, there have been small improvements. Whether you say that that is due to PDG or not is quite difficult, but there have been some improvements. But there hasn't been a major step change in closing that gap, that is true, and I think the conclusion that I draw is that these are major societal challenges and barriers that these young people face. Schools can do a certain amount, and of course they must do a certain amount, but to have a step change you do need to engage with the learners, with the parents and with the community and that's why the more successful schools do actually succeedit's because they do that. michelle brown am: In most successful schools, how much is the attainment gap being narrowed, in the schools that make the most effective use of PDG? meilyr rowlands: Well, that would vary from school to school. meilyr rowlands: Yes, I could have a list of schools and how much they've closed, perhaps. In 2017, we saw a re-widening of the attainment gap between pupils on free school meals and those not on free school meals. What effect do you think the Welsh Government's changes to performance measures have had in terms of impact? meilyr rowlands: Yes, they definitely had a direct impact on it, and probably there might well be an indirect, longer-term impact as well. But, clearly, changing the performance indicators had a direct, immediate effect, because some of those examinations, qualifications, courses that were typically followed by this cohort of students weren't any longer part of the headline performance indicators. Those sorts of things that many of these pupils used to succeed at, and therefore get the performance indicator for the school, no longer count. So, it's had a direct impact, and it's one of the reasons why it's quite difficult to compare the results of one year and another, because of these changes in performance indicators. Do you think there hasn't been any? Can we take it from what you've said that there's been a positive improvement, or has it been negative? meilyr rowlands: I think there's a growing realisation that secondary schools,key stage 4, is driven overly by performance indicators, and, whatever performance indicator you come up with, there will be unintended consequences. So, it's not, I think, useful to keep changing the performance indicators and think that you will get to a point where you solve the problem. What needs to be done is to have a different approach to accountability that doesn't put so much attention on these performance indicators, because what you're doing is you're just moving the problem around by changing the performance indicators. So, I think the previous performance indicators encouraged schools to enter, for example, whole cohorts to do BTEC science, and that's not a good idea because the GCSE sciences are betterpreparation to go on to A-level science, for example. So, you're cutting out the possibility of progression for those pupils.On the other hand, by discouragingthe new performance indicators discourage BTEC and now people are saying, 'We're not offering BTEC at all', and it is suitable for a certain cohort of pupils. So, it's very difficult to get the performance indicators absolutely right if you put so much pressure on schools to actually achieve those performance indicators. darren millar am: I share some of your concern around the unavailability now of BTEC in some schools. It strikes me that the decision to discourage the availability of BTEC, which is what the performance measures do, really is sending a message about vocational qualifications that is not helpful, actually, to many young people for whom vocational qualifications may be perfectly suitable. Is that something with which you concur? meilyr rowlands: I think it's one of the unintended consequences, and what I'm trying to say is that, almost inevitably, there will be unintended consequences. So, you can sympathise with the original decision to change the performance indicators in such a way that it encouraged more pupils to do GCSEs, for example, but it does have that unintended consequence. I wanted to ask you about looked-after children and adopted children, and how effective the PDG has been for those groups of children. So, to begin with, how well do the schools know that the PDG does exist for looked-after children and adopted children? meilyr rowlands: I think what we foundwe did a review of looked-after children fairly recently, and we found there was some confusion about where the grant was, who had the grant and how it was spent, and what the priorities of regional consortia were, because I think the grant goes to regional consortia now. So, I think schools aren't quite sure about how it's spent and what the priorities are. But the consortia are now using the grant, and there's some training being offered to schools around emotional behaviour and attachment training. There's some school-to-school work that is now being funded by the grant to share best practice, and there are some individual bursaries to support the work. simon brown: And on other developments, regional consortia, they've have appointed regional LAC co-ordinators, which has been helpful julie morgan am: For these particular groups? simon brown: Yes. And, as Claire saidshe gave some of the spend that the regional consortia are using, targeted spending. There's an issue about adopted children, I think, because, currently, the pupil-level annual school census data doesn't differentiate whether children are adopted or not. julie morgan am: Could you give some examples of some work that's been done with looked-after children that you feel has been effective? claire morgan: I think we'd probably need to go away and get that from our evidence base. I've mentioned before in this context that thisprevious committee, in the previous Assembly, did an inquiry into adopted children, where we met with a lot of adoptive parents. And one of the big issues that did come out was the fact that there was a great deal of concern about some of the insensitivities in the schools in dealing with adopted children, askingfor pictures of when the children were born and things like that that didn't show a degree of sensitivity. Do you feel that those sorts of issues are being addressed on a wider basis now, and are they being addressed through this grant, through the PDG grant? meilyr rowlands: We probably do need to come back to you with some more evidence on this. We've got two pieces of work currently that we're doing, whichwill give a little bit more evidence on this. We're doing a piece of work on managed moves and I think that will be helpfulbecause a lot of these pupils are subject to managed moves, and that's the sort of thing we'll be looking at in that report: what information is transferred from one organisation and from one school to another. I think that generally hasn't been veryhelpful, and thereisn't necessarily a good system for exchanging particularly their educational needssome of the basic things about their date of birth and whatever are transferred, but their educational needs, when children move from one school toanother. So, we've got a report coming out on that.The other piece of work we've been doing is on children who have had adverse experiences in their childhood and how schools deal with those traumatic backgrounds. julie morgan am: That would, of course, be much wider than looked-after and adopted children. But, if you don't mind, we'll try and get you somethingspecifically on julie morgan am: If you could, because there does generally seem to be a lack of knowledgeabout how effective thiswork is with looked-after and adopted children. You don't have any information about exclusion rates, for example, withlooked-after children, and theway this grant has been used to address those sorts of issues? meilyr rowlands: I think there is some data available. The Welsh Government's statistics on that come witha big cautionary note, because that data is subject to a lot of variationexactlywhat you're talking about, I think: different counties and differentauthorities do things differently. And I think the work we're doing on managed moves is very pertinent to that because managed moves don't count as part of the exclusion. And what about attendance? Anythingabout attendance with looked-after children? Any evidence of meilyr rowlands: I'll have to look that up as well I think. julie morgan am: I think, Chair, if we can have some more information on all of this, it would be great. john griffiths am: Okay, yes, we'll look forward to receiving that further information from you. mark reckless am: Could I just ask a follow-up to a response that we had last week when we had the EAS consortium in, amongst others? They told us that the specific grantthe pupil deprivation grantprincipally for looked-after children, they wereresponsible for, and thatcertainly the vast bulk ofthat was spent on a specific programme, aimed not atLACs specifically, but at all children considered vulnerable at times of transition,particularly into year 7. Does thatstrike you as an appropriate use of that grant? meilyr rowlands: I think transition is appropriatethat's quite sensible, but clearly if the grant is for looked-after children, itshould be spent on looked-after children. mark reckless am: Are there any other comments on that approach? I think, to take up what EAS has said, there weredifficulties about havingparticular programmes aimed specifically at individual looked-after children, and it was felt thatthey would benefit vulnerable children, who had more transitions between schoolsperhaps than others. Is that a sufficient link to justify how that grant is spent? I think this isreally in the wider context of how much schools need to make sure this grant goes towards thegroup it's specified for, and to what extent it is acceptable to blur the boundaries of that andperhaps this is just an example of a higher degree of blurring than some others. meilyr rowlands: I don't know enoughabout this particular initiative to comment, but I would have thought that looked-after children is a very small group and if you were to blur it that much, then itwouldn't be very targeted. I would have thought that if the grant isspecifically for looked-after children, itshould be more targeted, but I don't know the details. mark reckless am: Just following up onanother point, I think you said that the 'PLASS' data. I apologise that I'm not familiar with the abbreviation, but could you explain if anything was being done to addresspreviously looked-afterchildren who are nowadopted and seeking to ensure that they are measured to that data to allow proper tracking. Is that work that's in hand, do you know? Could you just clarify for me the 'PLASS' description and what information system that that refers to? meilyr rowlands: That's the information that schools give formally to WelshGovernment and every so often, the data that is collectedformally by WelshGovernment is improved and expanded. Previously, exclusions weren't collected through PLASCthe pupil level annual school censusand so wehad no proper data at all on exclusions. Now that's been improved, but I'm afraid I'm not sure exactly what you're referring to here. I think you were saying that previously looked-after children who are now adopted, unlike looked-after children, that wasn't tracked by the PLASC data. Looked-after children are differentiated, but whether they're adopted or notwhether anychildren are adoptedisn't picked up in the data at the moment. mark reckless am: But I think for the grant, it'spreviously looked-after children whohave since been adopted rather than alladopted children, isn't it? john griffiths am: Again,perhaps you could clarify that for usin the further information that you will provide. meilyr rowlands: Although, you'd probably be better off asking the Welsh Government directly. mark reckless am: Yes, I agreeI think that would be better, butjust toclarify finally from me, Chair: is your point that, if thatgroup isn't measured, then it is difficult to target them with this grant,and if we want them to be targeted with this grant, weshould ensure that they're tracked through that data system? meilyr rowlands: Yes, that sounds sensible. Did youconsider that the Schools Challenge Cymru programme was a success? meilyr rowlands: It was certainly variable. It lasted for a relatively short period of time, so it's quite difficult to be definitive about the evaluation of it, but it was certainly variable. There were improvements overall for the 40 schools over and above the general improvement that there was for all schools in Wales. So, it's quite difficult to say whether it was successful, because that was a fairly limited improvement for quite a lot of money. What strikes one, I think, was the variability in the success of it, and I think that was clear also at an operational level. It was clearly more successful in certain areas where all the various people involved in the work worked together effectively. And, in other cases, they weren't, and there had to be changes in personnel and that sort of thing. mark reckless am: Of the five schools within the programme that Estyn actually inspected in the last year of the programme,I think that three of those were in special measures and two required significant improvement. Doesn't that suggest that, as far as Estyn engaged with the programme, your evidence was not to suggest that it was being successful? meilyr rowlands: Not wildly successful, certainly, but many of these schools would have been in those sorts of categories in the past as well. As you say, many of these schools are still struggling schools, soit hasn't been a panacea. mark reckless am: Bearing in mind your remarks earlier over the focus on key stage 4, in particularthe C to D gradeboundary, what sort of minimum length of time should a programme like this run for if we are to expect success? meilyr rowlands: That's a hugely difficult question to answer, and it is at the core of whether this initiative was successful. There has been research, and people have looked at things like the City Challenge and have suggested that two or three years is too short a period to make a proper evaluation of how successful those particular initiatives were. I don't know of similar evaluations to that particular point in Wales for the Schools Challenge Cymru, but with similar initiatives in England,the suggestion has been that you need at least three years to be able to evaluate it properly. mark reckless am: The Schools Challenge Cymru advisers, I understand that Estyn met with those termly through the programme. Can you explain how useful that engagement was, and also perhaps compare or contrast it to the ongoing engagement youhave with the advisers from the regional consortia? meilyr rowlands: You know, the engagement we had with local authorities, and regional consortia, and with Schools Challenge Cymru adviserswas not really a problem for us. I think the challenge for Schools Challenge Cymru was that it was introduced at a time when regional consortia were just beginning.So, you had a period of time when it wasn't entirely clear what the responsibilities of regional consortia were, comparedwith local authorities. When they were all saying the same thing, having that extra resource, extra money, extra attention, was a positivething; but, clearly, in some cases, that relationshipdidn't always work, and some schools felt that they were being told differentthings by different agencies. mark reckless am: So, is Welsh Government now trying to do, through the regionalconsortia, what it was then trying to do through Schools Challenge Cymru? meilyr rowlands: Well, what you had then was you had all three: you had local authoritiesand regional consortia and Schools Challenge Cymru. I don't thinkwhat Welsh Governmentare doing now is the same as what they were trying to do in Schools Challenge Cymru, becauseI think what Schools Challenge Cymru did, and did well, I think, was identify that there are a small number of secondary schools that have particular challenges and they need over and above the normal local authority/regional consortiasupport, they need over and above that a certain quantum of support and resource. I think that's specifically what SchoolsChallenge Cymru was trying to do, and that's not quite the same as what the more universal provision of regional consortia is. john griffiths am: Okay, that's all we have time for in this session, I'm afraid. There are some questions that we haven't reached that we'll write to you on to obtain further responses, and there are some matters that you've identified where you need to provide us with furtherinformation also. May I thank you very much for coming along this morning to give evidence? You will be sent a transcript to check for factualaccuracy in the usualway. Welcome back, for item 3 on our agenda today, scrutiny of Estyn's annual report for 2016-17. We've got a number of areas to cover, but please, Members, feel free to raise whatever issues you think appropriate, becausethe areas that we've identified are a general guide only. Just to start with, what's your opinion about the way the Government has been introducing reforms in this area over this past inspection cycle? In general, what is your opinion about how effective that has been and how much of an impression has it had? meilyr rowlands: Well the seven year cycle encompasses three Governments if truth be told, but there has been a sense of continuity and progress made in the nature of policy work in general, starting with the fundamental things such as literacy and numeracy in the first instance and also behaviour and attendance, as I said earlier this morning. And then they've developed a far more comprehensive scheme that is at the heart of the development of the curriculum and pedagogy specifically. And I think that that general shift from the foundationsof literacy and numeracymoving towards the curriculum and pedagogy does make sense. And the other trend that we've seen is to promote collaboration and the self-improvement system, as it's called. llyr gruffydd am: So, you thinkand I'd agreethat the focus on pedagogy is correct and that this culture that appears to be putting more emphasis on self-improvement, and so on, is a positiveone. Are there aspects that haven't worked as well in your opinion? meilyr rowlands: Of course, one accepts that one would like to see development and progress happeningfar more quickly, but, even in that instance, we need to balance the need that we all have to see progress with the pressures that are on teachersthere are so many things changing. I think that the most striking aspect in looking back over the past seven years is that all aspects of work in the education systemI'm trying to avoid saying 'schools', because it's more than just schools; it's colleges and the system as a wholehave changed.All aspects of that have changed, and I think that we need thatall of those aspects need to be changed and improvedbut we need to balance that against the fact that we need to not go so fast, because workload on teachers. This responsibility of self-improvement means that there is more pressure on teachers and headteachers, ultimately. That's why Estyn was very pleased to collaborate with 15 other bodies to give guidance on workload for teachers, because we have to be very careful to get that right as well. llyr gruffydd am: But is it disappointing, then, in the latest annual report, that you are to all intents and purposes coming to the conclusion that the performance is consistent with how it has been over the past inspection cycle? Would you not expect some kind of progress or something more significant in terms of outcomes? meilyr rowlands: That's one way of looking at it. Another way, as I said earlier, is that all of these things are changing and, under those particular circumstances, that it's a good thing that teachers and the education system have been able to maintain standards and the quality of education. Of course, there is a risk that we are in this situation continuously, and therefore settling for managing to maintain, for me, perhaps wouldn't show enough ambition. Is there a risk that we will find ourselves continually? As you say, the inspection cycle has seen three Governments. meilyr rowlands: We are in the middle of a period of major change, and you're right that there is more change to come. The new curriculum will reach key stage 4 in around seven years again, so we're genuinely in the middle of this period of change. Perhaps 'revolutionary' is too strong a word, but it is the biggest change that I've seen in my career. Of course, we all wish to see swifter progress being made, but what that means in practice is that you push more changes through, or that you push through the changes that we currently have more quickly. Those are the kinds of practical questions that arise, and you have to remember that, in the classroom, what you will have are individual teachers having to prepare for a new GCSE, a new A-level, and there are new specifications in that regard, and it's a great deal of work. llyr gruffydd am: But you understand the point I was making about the risk of finding ourselves like this continually and therefore to say, if we were to interpret your conclusion in the recent report, that outcomes have been consistent over the inspection cycle doesn't mean that we are pushing enough or that the reforms happen in a way that allows progress in performance terms. meilyr rowlands: I would wish to see that we wouldn't be in this position continuously. I think that llyr gruffydd am: But you've just suggested that there are seven years ahead of us yet in terms of introducing these reforms. meilyr rowlands: But I do think that the reforms, in looking at them holistically, are fundamental, as I was saying. Well, I think one of the things, and it's difficult to answer that question, but one of the things that hasn't worked in the past is just doing one aspect of the system. We need to look at transforming the entire education systemat the same time,because if you just tinker with one part then it might have an unintended effect in another place. So, I think we need to look at the system as a whole, and I think that what's happening at the moment is a structural change to the system. What's your assessment, therefore, of how able or how ready schools are to deal with, in moving forward now, all of these changes and reforms? meilyr rowlands: Well, as I said, I think that they have coped with a whole host of changes, and that's something to be praised. We are disappointed the standards haven't improved as much as we would have liked to have seen, but we also need to be congratulating the workforce for getting to grips with so many changes in a relatively short period. So, I am confident in that sense, but we do have to be careful in looking out for the workload, because the culture of promoting is one of giving more responsibilities to teachers, to schools, to colleges and to headteachers. llyr gruffydd am: Would you also share the concern that the reduction in school budgets will worsen those risks that you referred to? meilyr rowlands: Yes. As you'll know, international research evidence shows that it is not the amount of funding that goes into education systems that dictates how effective they are. But it is true to say that, if you have financial cuts, that does cause practical problems for headteachers in having to lay off staff, and so on. mark reckless am: Could I ask the reasons for Professor Donaldson being asked to undertake a review of Estyn's role? meilyr rowlands: Yes. I would say that, wouldn't I, because I'm an inspector, but I think it's important that we practise what we preach. I think it is healthy for anybody to have that sort of external view, and I think in particular we're proud in Estyn that we are a body that is developing and trying new things and evolving continuously. But if you were to ask, 'Why now?', it's because of the extent of the education reform that we're particularly facing. So, I think it's a good thing to do at any given time, but considering the range and speed of change that we're facing in education now, I thought it was particularly important that we ask Graham Donaldson to look at the implications for our work of all this education reform. mark reckless am: What have been the biggest benefits to Wales of having Estyn as an independent body inspecting schools and other institutions in Wales compared to the work that Ofsted has done in England? meilyr rowlands: Well, we have very good relationships with Ofsted and with Education Scotland and the Education Training Inspectorate in Northern Ireland. I wouldn't like to compareI don't think it would be fair to compare ourselves. So, we're working quite closely with the home countries, but also further afield with Holland and with the Republic of Ireland, for example.So, we're always, all of us, learningfrom one another about what we think they do well and what they think we do well. I wouldn't think it's fair for me to say what I thinkyou know, where we're better than another country. But I think what is fair for me to ask is: perhaps could you highlight one or two areas where you believe that Estyn has a particulardifference of emphasis and approach from Ofsted? meilyr rowlands: I think one of the things we've done and we've developed over many yearsis the use of the nominee and peer inspectors in particular. So, we've got, I think, a really good tradition of doing that in Wales, and when we do meet other inspectorates, they're always very interested in that part of our work. We inspect a wide range of sectors, as you know, but the bulk of that inspection work is actuallydone now by peer inspectors. So, I think that, and the idea of a nominee, is also of interest to other inspectorates across the world. They're part of all the discussions so they actually understand how we've come to our report, and they can then help the organisation move forward after we've left. mark reckless am: I've clashed with Welsh Ministers on the absence of league tables for schools in Wales, with less accountability for their results than is the case in England. But, from, I think, at some point in 2014, you started in your inspection reports of primaryschools putting the comparison of how they were doing compared to other schools and local authoritiesand nationally, as well as what you've described as their family of schools, and being more transparent over their key stage 2 results. So, what led you to do that? What difference has that made? And was that decision taken by Estyn on its own account, or was that somethingthat was agreed with Welsh Ministers? meilyr rowlands: I did listen to Plenary, so I've heard you raise this issue. I'm sure it's inadvertenton your part, but you've confused absolutelyeveryone with this. So, if you want to know about your own school or any other school, you should go onto that website. You can look at it in terms of tables and data and graphs and it shows all that data that you refer to, and that's the right place to have it. Most of it is first-hand evidence that we see in the classroom and see in pupils' work, but we triangulate that with data and with what parents and pupils say and interviews with staff. Pre 2014, it was in the body of the text, and then after 2014 we put it in an appendix. We had a mid-cycle review and people felt it would be better in an appendix than in the body of the text, but it was always there. There's pros and cons on whether it shouldbe in the body of the text or in an appendix. mark reckless am: Well, certainly, the data became clear to me in reports after 2014 in a way it wasn't before. Can I just highlight a few of what I felt were either particularly striking statisticsor comparisonsor points that were made in your annualreport of potential concern? You state that headteachers do not understand the principles of good pedagogy or good practice in about three quarters of schoolsthis relates to the foundation phase. There's a lot of research, and our own evidence shows that, where it is implemented well, pupils benefit a lot from it and they're well prepared to be independentthinkers. So, it's a development that we should be proud of in Wales, I think, the foundation phase. There's a whole range of reasons, as I discuss in the annual report, why that might be the case.It is quite an innovative idea, and I think it's misunderstood by saying it's learning through play, because that's a bit too simplistic a definition of it. We have written a report recently on good practice in the foundation phase, so that we can try and explain clearly to people what the benefits of it are and how best to implement it. Many of them might not have taught in foundation phase, they might not have that infant background, they might have a junior-school background. There might not have been enoughwell, we say there wasn't enough trainingor there might be people who missed any training that there was then. So, overall, there is a large number of leaders who don't fully appreciate what the foundation phase could deliver. john griffiths am: Darrenis it on this? darren millar am: Yes, it is on this. , one of the problems that I know you've identified in the past is this lack of good practice being ableto travel into all parts of Wales, and, of course, we've got local authorities, we've got regional consortia, we've got the Welsh Governmentall of which want to see good practice replicated where possible. What opportunities are there, perhaps, to develop some other further opportunities for good practice to be shared and promoted? I know that the Wales Audit Office, for example, has its good practice exchange. Is there somethingsimilar that schools can engage with to make things happen? meilyr rowlands: It's a good question. , specifically to do with foundation phase, there is a foundation phaseI can't remember what it's called nowexcellence network I think, which is being relaunched. There's one for mathematicsa national network for excellence in mathematicsthere's one for science and there's one for foundation phase in particular. So, I think it is a challenge that we haven't cracked yet in Wales: how do we make sure thatgood practice does travel?I think one specifically for foundation phase is a good idea, because we've got a specific issue with the foundation phase. mark reckless am: When you say that john griffiths am: Mark, just before you go on, I think Julie wanted to come in on this point as well. I just wondered if you could give us some examples about how the foundation phase is not being implemented in the true spirit of the foundation phase in the three quarters of schools that you think fall. meilyr rowlands: Well, what we mean by that is schools not necessarily teaching badly, but in a more traditional way. Some schools actually reverted, after theintroduction of the new tests, from what was pedagogy that was in line with the foundation phase. And basically, if I understand it correctly, it's more to do with the children making their own choices about what they do. And that is pretty common in nursery and reception classes, but it's less common in year 1 and year 2. claire morgan: I think it is very much, as Meilyr said, the difference between a pupil-led learning experience or a teacher-led learning experience.Because of the lack of training and maybe the confidence to pursue that active and experiential learning approach, teachers have tended to resort to what they feel more comfortable with, which is more of an adult-led learningoften still high quality, but it doesn't ensure that the learners become far more independent, far more engaged in their learning. mark reckless am: So, when you say that some teachers are sort of holding children back,and in the report that three quarters of schools don't understand the principles of good pedagogy or good practice, what you mean is that teachers are using traditional methods, including whole-class teaching, rather than moving towards a pupil-led learning experience and one that you said was oversimplified as learning through play. May not the issue here therefore be that Estyn is seeking to impose this different approach on teachers who think that they are better able to teach children in the traditional way, which, at least in my experience, would be supported by quite a number of parents? meilyr rowlands: I don't think it's Estyn that'simposing it. mark reckless am: Do you support that policy? meilyr rowlands: Well, we do, actually. Our evidence, as I said, is that, when it is implemented properly, pupils do actually gain from it. But we're not imposing it, and what we're saying is that headteachers are not necessarily understanding it. Quite unusually, in this section, we have had to actually explain some of the technical terms, like 'continuous provision'.So that's, I think, one of the reasons why people don't understand it fully. That's why we did produce this quite substantial bit of work, trying to unpack what this actually means in practice and giving a lot of good examples of the practice. Given the timing of when it was brought in and where we are now, has that really had time to distil through the system and give compelling evidence that this approach works better than more traditional approaches? meilyr rowlands: I think it has, to be fair. I think this has, because we're talking about a lot of developmental work related to the foundation phase prior to 2010, but it became compulsory for all schools to deliver it from 2010 onwards. So, that gives enough time for children to have been through the whole of the foundationphase onto key stage 2, and we can see the effect of it. In the schools where there is good practice in the foundation phase, we can see the effect when we inspect on key stage 2 children. mark reckless am: So, would you be confident about this, in the next few years, feeding through into an improvement in Programme for International Student Assessments, rather than a further deterioration? meilyr rowlands: Yes. I think that if we did what Darren was talking about, getting more schools to share good practice, I think it will expand and more schools will take it on, yes. On the sharing of good practice, you put emphasis in the report on this being an improving area and trend for the future as well, but I think you did raise concerns that it wasn't monitored or evaluated sufficiently well, particularly where one school was supporting another. How should that be done better? meilyr rowlands: Well, I think this has been a theme of many of the issues we've raised: that, whatever the initiative, you can't tell whether it's been successful or not unless you evaluate it properly. I think that, with the development of thenational academy for educational leadership, I would hope that research skills and evaluative skills would be part of the kind of training that headteachers get that maybe in the past they didn't. So, that becomes more of the day-to-day work of schoolsthat naturally, whenever you do something,you evaluate it afterwards.We've evaluated a lot of the school-to-school work. We've published two or three reports on it, and we've identified what we think is good practice and not-so-good practice. john griffiths am: Okay, Mark? If we move on at this stageI wonder, before other Members come in, if I could ask about community-focused schools. Quite a lot of what we discussed earlier was around the importance of getting families and the community more involved in education, and one way of doing that, I think, is through community-focused schools that are very much accessible to the community, linked well with outside organisations, having an extended school-day offer. We have thetwenty-first century schools programme, butwe have a lot of schools existing that haven't been part of that. I just wondered to what extent Estyn might encourage or highlight the need to encourage greater consistency in community-focused schools across Wales, because I think there is a feeling that it is very inconsistent. We see that as, particularly, a solution for that long-standing issue we have in Wales in particular. I think it became thought of as meaning the community just uses the facilities in the evening and, of course, it's a much, much broader concept than that. I think some schools particularly didn't like the community using their facilities in the evening, and that became, I think, possibly part of the reason why community-focused schools didn't become more popular. The way I look at it is, as Claire was explaining earlier about the school offering all kinds of services to peopleyou know, family learning, those sorts of nurture groups, all those sorts of educationally focused services available from the school, and generally building relationships. john griffiths am: So, if there might be a mechanism that could have community-focused schools working in the way that you've described right across Wales, would Estyn be in favour of such a mechanism? meilyr rowlands: Absolutely, yes. Could I just ask one further question, then, before, as I said, I bring other Members in? There is a particular concern at the momentand has been for some timeabout white working-class children, and perhaps particularly boys, not attaining as they should through our education system. Is that something that Estyn recognises? Has Estyn done much work on that, and if so, what is that work? meilyr rowlands: We've done work on boys and girls, and we've done work on deprived childrenyou know, identified, as we were discussing this morning, by eligibility for free school meals. We haven't specifically looked at white working-class boys, but a lot of the solutions, and a lot of the good practice that we have identified generally, through the PDG and whatever I think is the way forward for that particular cohort as well. john griffiths am: So, you wouldn't see the need for a particular focus or a particular piece of workto identify whether there are aspects of education that might particularlybenefit that group. meilyr rowlands: I wouldn't object to doing a piece of work on that, in case we have missed something, but I suspect it would be the same schools that do well with that cohort that we've identified already for the same reasons, I suspect. To what extent has the rate of improvementdiffered between the primary and secondary sectors? meilyr rowlands: I'm not sure if there's been a difference in the rate of improvement, but certainly I've raised in this annual report, and indeed in previous annual reports, the difference between primary and secondary. We've got 7 in 10nearly three quartersof primary schools doing well and about half of secondary schools. Generally, there is a widening of gaps when you go from primary to secondary, but also it's from foundation phase to key stage 2 to key stage 3 to key stage 4. So, there's actually more excellence in secondary schools according to our inspections than in primary, although the overall proportion of good or better schools is higher in primary than in secondary. I think also, although I've got no evidence for this, it's probablymore difficultfor that community focus to work in a larger secondary school than a smaller primary school. The other one,of course,is the one we were talking about earlier this morning, the pressure on secondary schools to address performance indicators and examinations in particular. Another possible reason is the structureof secondary schools is subject-based, departmental-based, so children will get 10 to 12 different teachers. It's easier, therefore, in a primary school for the school to see the child as an individualand recognise their problems and their needs as a whole. So, I think there is a whole range of issues that explains or goes part way to explainingwhat you've identified. You touched on this quitea bit in your earlier evidence, but you said in the annual report that there's a danger that accountability measures might be having an effect on the advice being given to pupils about subjects they study. Do you have any evidence of that or is that a perception? meilyr rowlands: Well, I think everyone agrees that there's very strong evidence about that. john griffiths am: Okay, Michelle?Perhaps we'll move on at this stagewe haven't got a great deal of time leftif that's okay. julie morgan am: I wanted to ask about special schools in terms of your views about the standards in special schoolswhether you've got any views on that. meilyr rowlands: Yes, we highlighted special schools as a successful sector in the annual report, as we have overmany years. The small number of schools that don't do quite as well tend to be the schools that deal with children with emotional and behavioural difficulties. Possibly they don't have an overlap in catchment areas, they're quite geographicallyseparate, so they don't feel as if they're in competition with one another. meilyr rowlands: Sorry, I should have said that was mainly to do with the maintained sector. The independent sector tends to focus maybe on those children with emotional and behavioural difficulties, so they have the more difficult task to begin with. We visit them on an annual basis to make sure that they're addressing all our recommendations, and continue to meet the needs of those pupils. And also, I think there's been a trend where more of those independent schools now have. And what about pupil referral units? How are the standards there? meilyr rowlands: Yes, they're more variable. We've contributed a lot of evidence to the various working groups that have been looking at EOTASthat's education other than at school. ADEW, which is theAssociation of Directors of Education in Wales, have now set up a national body to share good practice amongst PRUs, so I think that is a very positive step forward, because that sharing, I think, wasn't happening with PRUs. I think what we need to do with PRUs is to get them to be more of a part of the education system as a whole. So, the more we can do to involve them in national events, and also, I think, make their governance more like that of a school so that they become more similar to schoolsthat makes it easier for them to share practice with schools. The percentage of further education colleges who have reached a good or better standard has increased, of course, over the past inspection cycle. I'd just like to ask what you think is responsible for that, and are there any lessons we can take out of that and transfer to other sectors within education? meilyr rowlands: Thank you for the question, but I'm going to ask Simon to answer. simon brown: As you're aware, the number of collegesfrom 22 to 12, and I think those mergers resulted in establishments that were stronger in terms of their leadership in particular. That leadership, I thinkthe characteristics we have seen in the 'good' or 'better'as you say, 80 per cent leadership good or betterhas been a culture of openness, a culture of clarity of purpose about where the college is going. Obviously, if you're merging large colleges as they did in north Wales, keeping staff morale high is quite a skill, and I thinkthe leadership have done that very well. They've also supported managers at all levels, and they've encouraged managers to support staff at all levels. I did a trainingsession for college governors about a month ago, and what struck me was the breadth of experience of the college governors, from industry, from academia. They are a verychallenging set of governors, I think, who hold the senior leadershipto account in the colleges, and that helps to push standards forward. Teaching is 'good' or 'better' in 70 per centof colleges because thesenior leadership team are encouragingteachers in colleges to innovate, encouraging them to engage actively in performance managementsystems, and to become reflective practitioners in the colleges. llyr gruffydd am: And how many of those do you think could effectively be transferred or encouraged in other sectors? simon brown: But I think one sector that. I think the other post-16 sector, which is work-based learning llyr gruffydd am: Well, yes, I was going to ask you. As we said in theannual report, standards are 'good' or 'better' in only 50 per cent of work-based learning companies, mainly because the completion rates of learners are not what we'd expect, the progression that learnersmake isn't what we'd expect. And that is mainlydue to the way in which the leadership teams monitor progressmonitor progress in themselvesas a provider, but, more importantly, the way theymanage sub-contractors, because, as you will already know, there's 19 lead providers; there's about 100 training providers. And the companies that are doing better, or the training providers doing better, are thosethat have got a firm grip on their sub-contractors, and, most importantly, they put quality as the top part of any agenda at any meeting. And, of course, if you're challenging your sub-contractors aboutquality, that will impacton standards of teaching, and, hopefully, ultimately, on standards of performance on the learners. And I think, to go backto your original question, Llyr, the sort of leadership models that FE colleges have, I thinksome of the work-based learning providers would be wise to start to emulate those. It's beginningto happen, becauseFE is getting more engaged in the work-based learning world, so I think some of those behaviours will start to rub off on the companies. llyr gruffydd am: So, who would you look to drive some of those changes through then? Is it the sector themselves, or to what extent can Government and others do things? simon brown: Well, as you know, Meilyr alludedto the changes across all sectors. We've got PCETwe've got the post-compulsory education and trainingreforms under way. But I think, in the shorter term, some of the work that groups like Colegau Cymru and the National Training Federation Walesare doing, sharing best practice, bringing the colleges and the training companies together, is beginning to help. I'm going to the national training federation conference tomorrow in Cardiff, and I notice the attendance therethere's a lot of FE colleges attending, senior staff of FE colleges, as well as from the work-based training companies. john griffiths am: Okay, Llyr? We haven't got very long left, but we've got five minutes or so for some further questions from Hefin David. hefin david am: With regard to local authorities, you found shortcomings in your 2010-14 inspection in 15 of the 22. And one of the things that struck me in the report was where you said that you found ineffective processes for self-evaluating improvement within those authorities, but you've also said that there's been a high turnover of directors andnewdirectors in place inmany of them. Has that had apositive effect on that self-evaluation process? simon brown: As you're aware, over the past three years, out of the 22 authorities, there have been 40 new directors, over the past three years. So, that's one factor.I think the other factor is that the status of educationdirectors has changed quite significantly.Some local authorities are a member of the corporate team and they aredirectors ofeducation and children's services, so they've got very broad portfolios. In other ones, they're being treated more like heads of service, so heads ofdepartment level. hefin david am: I know that Caerphilly went in the opposite directionfrom having a chiefeducation officer to then appointing a director, I think. simon brown: I'm sorry? hefin david am: In Caerphilly county borough, they went from having a chief education officer and now have got adirector again. But, in many cases, they're the same people, aren't they? It'sjust that their roles are changed. I think the other thing that's happened, of course, with the role ofthedirector of education, is, because of the regional consortia nowdoing the school improvement function, a large chunk of that role has now moved to the consortia. So, I think it's early days to say what the impact of that new cohort ofdirectors will be, but, of course, we're starting a new inspection cycle in September. Thosereports are not yet published, but what I can say is that neither of thoseauthorities are in follow-up. hefin david am: But you said, even though it's not in follow-up, it was still showing signs of not being able to reflect effectively on improvementinthe report. hefin david am: Right, okay, but some of those not in follow-up were notreflectingeffectively ontheir improvementis the statement thatwas made inthe report. simon brown: What we're seeing, and we've seen this before in the previous cycle, is that the performance of some authorities is patchy. I think I said to committee last year those authorities are ones that we held improvement conferences in last year. That was to get the senior leadershipboth political and officer-led leadershipand the consortia andWelsh Governmentand the WalesAudit Office and, as it was, the Care and Social Services Inspectorate Wales,around the table to get those senior leadership teams to actually identify what the longer-term issues are, to surface those issues and to puttogether an action plan.We'rerevisiting those three authorities very, very shortly. Thefirst of therevisits is in April to see what progress they've made over the past 12 months or so. And, with things like the curriculum reforms, you've identified the new directors in place, but you've said that, although they're new directors, they'reactually veryexperienced in education, so therefore you're confident thatthey're going to manage thereforms well as they aredeveloped inthe next few years. simon brown: I think one development, and I've raised this in committee before, was. One of our concerns, apart from the fact that there was a large turnover of directors, was what sort of level of training senior leaders and middle managers were getting in those authorities. One of the things that I'm quite pleased to report is that the Association of Directors of Education in Wales and Welsh Government havestepped up to address that issue. Last year, all serving directors attended residential courses run by the Staff College Wales, facilitated by ADEW, and ADEW have just finished the first round of director. The name of the course is the 'Welsh future leaders in education' course and 26 people have just finished thataspiring directors. That course, again, is developed by the Staff College Wales, but it has a lot of external input. They're putting in directors and chief executives from Scotland, they're putting in headteachers of very successful schools in England, who've got current grass-roots experience to share with these aspiring directors. So, I think the concerns that we had previously about the professional learning for middle managers and leaders in local authorities are being addressed. The proof will be in the pudding when we start to do the inspection cycle, but at least the issue now is being tackled. hefin david am: Can I just look at, then, consortia?One of the criticisms in the report was that national policy wasn't being put in contextI think that was the statement in the reportin certain consortia. Can you elaborate on what you meant by that? simon brown: Yes, when we talked, we said that. One is that the national model for regional working is being revised at the moment, and that work is ongoing by Welsh Government.That is to bring greater consistency to the four consortia, because one of our concerns, which weexpressed in this reportand we expressed in previous years, is that, although the national model had a particular approach back in 2012, when Robert Hill did the first review, it had a particular approach to the consortia being fairly similar, over the years, they've gone in four different directions. To be fair, over the past couple of years, the consortia are now collaborating much closer together. They are working togetherfor example, I mentioned earlier about the regional co-ordinators for LAC. Whereas before they were working more in silos, they are now working much closer together.So, I think what we were referring to, and what we were talking about in the report, is the fact that the consortia need to have a more consistent approach across all four regions. And the relationships with local authorities, you said that the sharing of information with the local authorities is not always acted upon by local authoritiesfrom the consortia. Is that a failure of communication, or is that something that sits withthe local authority to acknowledge? simon brown: I don't think it's a failure of communication. In the cases where some authorities haven't acted sufficiently in intervening in schools or in issuing warningletters, the consortia have been quite clear. But, again, I think that is beginning to improve, because the local authorities are quite sensitive to the fact we are now going to be re-inspecting them and looking at them, and that is one of the issues we'll be picking up on. And, in order to do their jobs, the consortia need to be suitably resourced.Are they, and are they fit for the challenges ahead? simon brown: It's not for us to comment on whether each consortium is sufficiently funded or not, but what we would say is that, generally,in the past, they've spent perhaps too large a proportion of their fundson challenge work and not enough funding on support work, but that, again, is moving. We've picked up that GwE, for example,is in the process of renaming their challenge advisers 'support advisers',because they're moving their culture more over to supporting schools to deal with all the raft of reforms that Meilyr mentioned, and that is,it seems to me, an entirely sensible way to go. We have one paper to note, which is a letter from the Chair of the Public Accounts Committee to the Welsh Government regarding the Hwb programme.Is committee content to note that paper? Yes.Thank you very much. Item 5, then, is a motion under Standing Order 17.42to resolve to exclude the public from the remainder of this meeting
OK , so , you 've got some , Xerox things to pass out ? phd a: Yeah , professor d: That are phd a:  .  , lowering the word hour rate is fine , but having big font ! phd a: Next time we will put colors or something . phd a: OK , s so there is kind of summary of what has been done professor d:  Go ahead . So since last week we 've started to fill the column with   features w with nets trained on PLP with on - line normalization but with delta also , because the column was not completely professor d:    phd a: well , it 's still not completely filled , professor d:  phd a: but we have more results to compare with network using without PLP and finally , hhh ,  ehhh PL -  delta seems very important . If you take  , let 's say , anyway Aurora - two - B , so , the next t the second , part of the table , professor d:   phd a:  when we use the large training set using French , Spanish , and English , you have one hundred and six without delta and eighty - nine with the delta . professor d: a And again all of these numbers are with a hundred percent being , the baseline performance , phd a: Yeah , on the baseline , yeah . So professor d: but with a mel cepstra system going straight into the HTK ? phd a: Yeah . So now we see that the gap between the different training set is much   much smaller professor d: Yes . phd a: But , actually , for English training on TIMIT is still better than the other languages . If you take the second set of experiment for Italian , so , the mismatched condition , professor d:   phd a:  when we use the training on TIMIT so , it 's multi - English , we have a ninety - one number , professor d:   phd a: And , yeah , and here the gap is still more important between using delta and not using delta . If y if I take the training s the large training set , it 's we have one hundred and seventy - two , professor d: Yes . Yeah , so the second point is that we have no single cross - language experiments , that we did not have last week .  , so this is training the net on French only , or on English only , and testing on Italian . phd a: And training the net on French only and Spanish only and testing on ,  TI - digits . What we see is that these nets are not as good , except for the multi - English , which is always one of the best . Yeah , then we started to work on a large dat database containing , sentences from the French , from the Spanish , from the TIMIT , from SPINE ,  from  English digits , and from Italian digits . phd a: and  , actually we did this before knowing the result of all the data , so we have to to redo the  the experiment training the net with ,  PLP , but with delta . Well , it 's it 's better than the net using French , Spanish , and English only . The first one , yeah , is combining , two feature streams ,  using and each feature stream has its own MPL . And the third one is to u use a single KLT trans transform features as well as MLP outputs . You know you can you can comment these results , phd b: Yes , I can s I would like to say that , for example , mmm , if we doesn't use the delta - delta ,  we have an improve when we use s some combination . But when phd a: Yeah , we ju just to be clear , the numbers here are  recognition accuracy . phd b: w Yeah , this Yeah , this number recognition acc phd a: So it 's not the Again we switch to another phd b: Yes , and the baseline the baseline have i is eighty - two . phd b: Yeah phd a: So it 's experiment only on the Italian mismatched for the moment for this . phd b: And first in the experiment - one I I do I I use different MLP , professor d:   And I try to combine different type of feature , but the result is that the MSG - three feature doesn't work for the Italian database because never help to increase the accuracy . phd a: Yeah , eh , actually , if w we look at the table , the huge table , we see that for TI - digits MSG perform as well as the PLP , professor d:   phd a: but this is not the case for Italian what where the error rate is c is almost  twice the error rate of PLP . phd a: So , well , I don't think this is a bug but this this is something in probably in the MSG  process that  I don't know what exactly . Perhaps the fact that the the there 's no low - pass filter , well , or no pre - emp pre - emphasis filter and that there is some DC offset in the Italian , or , well , something simple like that . But that we need to sort out if want to  get improvement by combining PLP and MSG professor d:   phd a: And as Carmen said , if we combine the two , we have the result , basically , of PLP . professor d: I  , the  , baseline system when you said the baseline system was  ,  eighty - two percent , that was trained on what and tested on what ? That was ,  Italian mismatched d  , digits , is the testing , phd b: Yeah . professor d: So the " mismatch " just refers to the noise and and ,  microphone and so forth , phd a: Yeah . professor d: right ? So ,  did we have So would that then correspond to the first line here of where the training is is the  Italian digits ? phd b: The train the training of the HTK ? professor d: The phd b: Yes . So ,  So what that says is that in a matched condition , we end up with a fair amount worse putting in the  PLP . Now w would do we have a number , I suppose for the matched I I don't mean matched , but  use of Italian training in Italian digits for PLP only ? phd b:  yes ? phd a:  yeah , so this is basically this is in the table . phd a: Fift - So No , it 's it 's the phd b: No . professor d: No , fifty - two percent of eighty - two ? phd a: Of of of  eighteen phd b: Eighty . So  professor d: Oh this is accuracy !  phd a: so we have nine nine let 's say ninety percent . professor d: OK , so even just PLP , it is not , in the matched condition  I wonder if it 's a difference between PLP and mel cepstra , or whether it 's that the net half , for some reason , is not helping . It 's not Do you have this result with PLP alone , j fee feeding HTK ? professor d: So , s phd a: That That 's what you mean ? phd b: Yeah , phd a: Just PLP at the input of HTK . professor d: so adding MSG phd a:  professor d:  Well , but that 's yeah , that 's without the neural net , phd a: Yeah , that 's without the neural net professor d: right ? phd a: and that 's the result basically that OGI has also with the MFCC with on - line normalization . phd b:  phd a: Eighty - two is the it 's the Aurora baseline , so MFCC . Then we can use well , OGI , they use MFCC th the baseline MFCC plus on - line normalization professor d: Oh , I 'm sorry , I k I keep getting confused because this is accuracy . phd a: So what happ what happens is that when we apply on - line normalization we jump to almost ninety percent . If we use n neural network , even if the features are not correctly normalized , we jump to ninety percent . So professor d: So we go from eighty - si eighty - eight point six to to ninety , or something . phd a: Well , ninety No , I  ninety It 's around eighty - nine , ninety , eighty - eight . So ,  So actually , the answer for experiments with one is that adding MSG , if you  does not help in that case . professor d: The other ones , we 'd have to look at it , but And the multi - English , does  So if we think of this in error rates , we start off with ,  eighteen percent error rate , roughly . professor d:  and we  almost ,  cut that in half by  putting in the on - line normalization and the neural net . About ,  sixteen percent or something of the error , if we use multi - English instead of the matching condition . OK ? So then you 're assuming multi - English is closer to the kind of thing that you could use since you 're not gonna have matching , data for the  for the new for the other languages and so forth .  , one qu thing is that ,  I think I asked you this before , but I wanna double check . When you say " ME " in these other tests , that 's the multi - English , phd a: That 's it 's a part it 's professor d: but it is not all of the multi - English , right ? It is some piece of part of it . professor d: And the multi - English is how much ? phd b: You have here the information . professor d: Oh , so you used almost all You used two thirds of it , phd a: Yeah . So , it it 's still it hurts you seems to hurt you a fair amount to add in this French and Spanish . grad c: Well Stephane was saying that they weren't hand - labeled , phd a: Yeah , it 's phd b: Yeah . Mmm , with the experiment type - two , I first I tried to to combine , nnn , some feature from the MLP and other feature another feature . phd b: And we s we can first the feature are without delta and delta - delta , and we can see that in the situation , the MSG - three , the same help nothing . phd b: And then I do the same but with the delta and delta - delta PLP delta and delta - delta . And they all p but they all put off the MLP is it without delta and delta - delta . And we have a l little bit less result than the the the baseline PLP with delta and delta - delta . phd b: Maybe if when we have the new the new neural network trained with PLP delta and delta - delta , maybe the final result must be better . phd a: Actually , just to be some more phd b:  phd a: Do This number , this eighty - seven point one number , has to be compared with the professor d: Yes , yeah ,  it can't be compared with the other phd a: Which number ? professor d: cuz this is ,  with multi - English , training . professor d: So you have to compare it with the one over that you 've got in a box , which is that ,  the eighty - four point six . professor d: So phd a: Yeah , but  in this case for the eighty - seven point one we used MLP outputs for the PLP net professor d: Yeah . phd b: No , but they they feature @ @ without phd a: So we use feature out  , net outputs together with features . So yeah , this is not perhaps not clear here but in this table , the first column is for MLP and the second for the features . So you 're saying w so asking the question , " What what has adding the MLP done to improve over the , phd a: So , just Yeah so , actually it it it decreased the the accuracy . phd a: And even the MLP alone What gives the MLP alone ? Multi - English PLP . So we have our eighty - three point six and now eighty - eighty point six , phd b: But phd a: that gives eighty - seven point one . Eighty - s I thought it was eighty Oh , OK , eighty - three point six and eighty eighty - eight point six . But I don't know but maybe if we have the neural network trained with the PLP delta and delta - delta , maybe tha this can help . professor d: Well , that 's that 's one thing , but see the other thing is that ,  it 's good to take the difficult case , but let 's let 's consider what that means . What what we 're saying is that one o one of the things that  my interpretation of your your s original suggestion is something like this , as motivation . When we train on data that is in one sense or another , similar to the testing data , then we get a win by having discriminant training . professor d: When we train on something that 's quite different , we have a potential to have some problems . professor d: And , if we get something that helps us when it 's somewhat similar , and doesn't hurt us too much when it when it 's quite different , that 's maybe not so bad . professor d: So the question is , if you took the same combination , and you tried it out on ,  on say digits , phd a: On TI - digits ? OK .  , then does that , eh you know maybe with similar noise conditions and so forth , does it does it then look much better ? phd a:   professor d: And so what is the range over these different kinds of  of tests ? So , an anyway . phd b: And , with this type of configuration which I do on experiment using the new neural net with name broad klatt s twenty - seven , d I have found more or less the same result . phd a: So , it 's slightly better , phd b: Little bit better ? phd a: yeah . professor d: And and you know again maybe if you use the , delta there , you would bring it up to where it was ,  you know at least about the same for a difficult case . phd a: It 's either less information from the neural network if we use only the silence output . And then w with the first configuration , I f I am found that work , doesn't work professor d: Yeah . Because I for the del Engli - PLP delta and delta - delta , here I have eighty - five point three accuracy , and with the second configuration I have eighty - seven point one . professor d: by the way , there is a another , suggestion that would apply , to the second configuration , which , was made , by , Hari . And that was that , if you have  feed two streams into HTK , and you , change the ,  variances if you scale the variances associated with ,  these streams  , you can effectively scale the streams . Right ? So , you know , without changing the scripts for HTK , which is the rule here , you can still change the variances phd a:   professor d: And , so , if you do that , for instance it may be the case that , the MLP should not be considered as strongly , for instance . professor d: And , so this is just setting them to be , excuse me , of equal equal weight . professor d: Right ? You know , I I 'm sorry to say that gives more experiments if we wanted to look at that , but but , you know on the other hand it 's just experiments at the level of the HTK recognition . Yeah , you have to change the No , you can just do it in as once you 've done the training grad c: And then you can vary it . professor d: Yeah , the training is just coming up with the variances so I guess you could you could just scale them all . But Is it i th  the HTK models are diagonal covariances , so I d Is it professor d: That 's  , exactly the point , I think , that if you change  , change what they are phd a:  . professor d: It 's diagonal covariance matrices , but you say what those variances are . professor d: So , that you know , it 's diagonal , but the diagonal means th that then you 're gonna it 's gonna it 's gonna internally multiply it and and  , i it im  implicitly exponentiated to get probabilities , and so it 's it 's gonna it 's it 's going to affect the range of things if you change the change the variances of some of the features . phd b: do ? professor d: So , i it 's precisely given that model you can very simply affect , the s the strength that you apply the features . So it could just be that h treating them equally , tea treating two streams equally is just just not the right thing to do . Of course it 's potentially opening a can of worms because , you know , maybe it should be a different number for for each kind of test set , or something , phd a:   professor d: So I guess the other thing is to take you know if one were to take , you know , a couple of the most successful of these , phd a: Yeah , and test across everything . phd a: So , the next point , yeah , we 've had some discussion with Steve and Shawn , about their  , articulatory stuff ,  . phd a: discussion with Hynek , Sunil and Pratibha for trying to plug in their our our networks with their within their block diagram , where to plug in the the network , after the the feature , before as  a as a plugin or as a anoth another path , discussion about multi - band and TRAPS , actually Hynek would like to see , perhaps if you remember the block diagram there is , temporal LDA followed b by a spectral LDA for each  critical band . And he would like to replace these by a network which would , make the system look like a TRAP . Basically , this is a TRAP system kind of TRAP system , but where the neural network are replaced by LDA .  , yeah , and about multi - band , I started multi - band MLP trainings ,  mmh Actually , I w I w hhh prefer to do exactly what I did when I was in Belgium . So I take exactly the same configurations , seven bands with nine frames of context , and we just train on TIMIT , and on the large database , so , with SPINE and everything . So , this would would be something between TRAPS and multi - band because we still have quite large bands , and but with a lot of context also . So  Yeah , we still have to work on Finnish , basically , to make a decision on which MLP can be the best across the different languages .  , well , the next part of the document is , well , basically , a kind of summary of what everything that has been done . We have seventy - nine M L Ps trained on one , two , three , four , three , four , five , six , seven ten on ten different databases . phd a: the number of frames is bad also , so we have one million and a half for some , three million for other , and six million for the last one .  , yeah ! As we mentioned , TIMIT is the only that 's hand - labeled , and perhaps this is what makes the difference . First ,  with respect to the on - line normalization , there are that use bad on - line normalization , and other good on - line normalization . With respect to the features , with respect to the use of delta or no ,  with respect to the hidden layer size and to the targets . s What 's this ? We only have two hundred eighty six different tests And no not two thousand . phd b: I say this morning that @ @ thought it was the professor d: Alright , now I 'm just slightly impressed , OK . but when the M - MLP is trained on the  is not trained on the target task , it increased the error rate compared to using straight features . Except if the features are bad  , actually except if the features are not correctly on - line normalized . In this case the tandem is still better even if it 's trained on not on the target digits . phd a: so the fourth point is , yeah , the TIMIT plus noise seems to be the training set that gives better the best network . professor d: So , on the MSG  problem  , I think that in in the  , in the short time solution  , that is , trying to figure out what we can proceed forward with to make the greatest progress , phd a:   professor d: much as I said with JRASTA , even though I really like JRASTA and I really like MSG , phd a:   professor d: I think it 's kind of in category that it 's , it it may be complicated . professor d: And  it might be if someone 's interested in it , certainly encourage anybody to look into it in the longer term , once we get out of this particular rush  for results . professor d: But in the short term , unless you have some some s strong idea of what 's wrong , phd a: I don't know at all but I 've perhaps I have the feeling that it 's something that 's quite quite simple or just like nnn , no high - pass filter professor d: Yeah , probably . professor d: There 's supposed to well MSG is supposed to have a an on - line normalization though , right ? phd a: It 's There is , yeah , an AGC - kind of AGC . professor d: Yeah , but also there 's an on - line norm besides the AGC , there 's an on - line normalization that 's supposed to be  , yeah , phd a: Mmm . professor d: In fac in fact the on - line normalization that we 're using came from the MSG design , phd a:  . Are your results are still with the bad the bad phd b: Maybe , may No ? With the better phd a: With the O - OLN - two ? phd b: No ? phd a: Ah yeah , you have you have OLN - two , phd b: Oh ! Yeah , yeah , yeah ! With " two " , with " on - line - two " . professor d: " Two " is good ? phd a: And professor d: No , " two " is bad . It 's probably something simple  , i if if  someone , you know , wants to play with it for a little bit . professor d: but but my my guess would be that it 's something that is a simple thing that could take a while to find . That 's that what we were concerned about is that if it 's not on the target task If it 's on the target task then it it it helps to have the MLP transforming it . professor d: If it  if it 's not on the target task , then , depending on how different it is ,  you can get  , a reduction in performance . professor d: And the question is now how to how to get one and not the other ? Or how to how to ameliorate the the problems . professor d: because it it certainly does is nice to have in there , when it when there is something like the training data . So , the the reason Yeah , the reason is that the perhaps the target the the task dependency the language dependency , and the noise dependency professor d: So that 's what you say th there . phd a: Well , the e e But this is still not clear because , I I I don't think we have enough result to talk about the the language dependency . Well , the TIMIT network is still the best but there is also an the other difference , the fact that it 's it 's hand - labeled .  , I d I don't think we want to mess with the microphones but it 's  Just  , have a seat . s Summary of the first  ,  forty - five minutes is that some stuff work and works , and some stuff doesn't OK , phd a: We still have  this One of these perhaps ? phd b: Yeah .  professor d: Yeah , I guess we can do a little better than that but I think if you if you start off with the other one , actually , that sort of has it in words and then th that has it the associated results . So you 're saying that  , although from what we see , yes there 's what you would expect in terms of a language dependency and a noise dependency . That is , when the neural net is trained on one of those and tested on something different , we don't do as well as in the target thing . But you 're saying that  , it is Although that general thing is observable so far , there 's something you 're not completely convinced about . What what do you mean ? phd a: mmm , that the the fact that s Well , for for TI - digits the TIMIT net is the best ,  which is the English net . But you have two two effects , the effect of changing language and the effect of training on something that 's Viterbi - aligned instead of hand hand - labeled . professor d: Do you think the alignments are bad ?  , have you looked at the alignments at all ? What the Viterbi alignment 's doing ? phd a: Mmm . Because , that is just looking but  ,  It 's not clear to me you necessarily would do so badly from a Viterbi alignment . But , perhaps it 's not really the the alignment that 's bad but the just the ph phoneme string that 's used for the alignment professor d: Aha ! phd a: Mmm .  professor d: The pronunciation models and so forth phd a:  for We It 's single pronunciation ,  professor d: Aha . phd a: so we asked people to listen to the  the sentence and we gave the phoneme string and they kind of correct them .  , the third The third  issue is the noise dependency perhaps but , well , this is not clear yet because all our nets are trained on the same noises and professor d: I thought some of the nets were trained with SPINE and so forth . professor d: OK , yeah , just don't just need more more results there with that @ @ .  , with respect to the network size , there 's one experiment that 's still running and we should have the result today , comparing network with five hundred and one thousand units . We can , we can tell which training set gives the best result , but we don't know exactly why . professor d: " Multi - multi - English " just means " TIMIT " , phd a: Yeah . professor d: It 's sort of , yes it 's mul it 's multi -  - purpose . So Yeah , the training targets actually , the two of the main issues perhaps are still the language dependency and the noise dependency . And perhaps to try to reduce the language dependency , we should focus on finding some other kind of training targets . For moment you use we use phonetic targets but we could also use articulatory targets , soft targets , and perhaps even ,  use networks that doesn't do classification but just regression so  , train to have neural networks that  , professor d:   phd a: does a regression and well , basically com com compute features and noit not , nnn , features without noise . phd a:  professor d: Yeah , that seems like a good thing to do , probably ,  not  again a short - term sort of thing . professor d:  one of the things about that is that  it 's e u the ri I guess the major risk you have there of being is being dependent on very dependent on the kind of noise and and so forth . phd a: So , this is w w i wa wa this is one thing , this this could be could help could help perhaps to reduce language dependency and for the noise part  we could combine this with other approaches , like , well , the Kleinschmidt approach . I think Kleinschmidt was using more than fifty different noises to train his network , phd b: Yeah . phd a: and So this is one approach and the other is multi - band  , that I think is more robust to the noisy changes . phd a: So perhaps , I think something like multi - band trained on a lot of noises with  , features - based targets could could could help . professor d: Yeah , if you i i It 's interesting thought maybe if you just trained up  w yeah , one one fantasy would be you have something like articulatory targets and you have  some reasonable database ,  but then which is  copied over many times with a range of different noises , phd a:   professor d: And  If Cuz what you 're trying to do is come up with a a core , reasonable feature set which is then gonna be used  , by the the   system . The future work is , well , try to connect to the to make to plug in the system to the OGI system . professor d: And I guess , you know , the the the real open question , e u there 's lots of open questions , but one of the core quote " open questions " for that is  , if we take the  you know , the best ones here , maybe not just the best one , but the best few or something You want the most promising group from these other experiments .  , how well do they do over a range of these different tests , not just the Italian ? phd a: Mmm , professor d:  . professor d: y Right ? And then  then see , again , how We know that there 's a mis there 's a  a a loss in performance when the neural net is trained on conditions that are different than than ,  we 're gonna test on , but well , if you look over a range of these different tests  , how well do these different ways of combining the straight features with the MLP features ,  stand up over that range ? phd b:   And  , take let 's say , just take  multi - English cause that works pretty well for the training . How does that How does that compare between the phd a: So all the all the test sets you mean , yeah . professor d: All the different test sets , phd a: And professor d: and for and for the couple different ways that you have of of of combining them . And perhaps doing this for cha changing the variance of the streams and so on getting different scaling phd b:   Yeah , so thi this sh would be more working on the MLP as an additional path instead of an insert to the to their diagram . Perhaps the insert idea is kind of strange because nnn , they they make LDA and then we will again add a network does discriminate anal nnn , that discriminates , professor d: Yeah . It 's a little strange phd a: or ? Mmm ? professor d: but on the other hand they did it before . And because also perhaps we know that the when we have very good features the MLP doesn't help .  , we we wanna get their path running here , right ? If so , we can add this other stuff . professor d: as an additional path right ? phd a: Yeah , the the way we want to do professor d: Cuz they 're doing LDA RASTA . phd a: The d What ? professor d: They 're doing LDA RASTA , phd a: Yeah , the way we want to do it perhaps is to just to get the VAD labels and the final features . professor d: yeah ? phd a: So they will send us the Well , provide us with the feature files , professor d: I see . phd a: and with VAD  , binary labels so that we can  , get our MLP features and filter them with the VAD and then combine them with their f feature stream . First thing of course we 'd wanna do there is to make sure that when we get those labels of final features is that we get the same results as them . You mean Oh , yeah ! Just re re retraining r retraining the HTK ? professor d: Yeah just th w i i Just to make sure that we have we understand properly what things are , our very first thing to do is to is to double check that we get the exact same results as them on HTK . But ,  just for the testing , jus just make sure that we get the same results so we can duplicate it before we add in another phd a: Mmm . Yeah , so fff , LogRASTA , I don't know if we want to We can try networks with LogRASTA filtered features . But professor d: Oh ! You know , the other thing is when you say comb I 'm I 'm sorry , I 'm interrupting . that u  , when you 're talking about combining multiple features ,  Suppose we said , " OK , we 've got these different features and so forth , but PLP seems pretty good . We have different languages , we have different different noises ,  If we have some drastically different conditions and we just train up different M L Ps with them . What what What Mike found , for the reverberation case at least , who knows if it 'll work for these other ones . That is , that yes , if you knew what the reverberation condition was gonna be and you trained for that , then you got the best results . But if you had , say , a heavily - reverberation ca heavy - reverberation case and a no - reverberation case , and then you fed the thing ,  something that was a modest amount of reverberation then you 'd get some result in between the two . So you you think it 's perhaps better to have several M L Yeah but professor d: It works better if what ? phd a: Yea professor d: I see . Well , see , i oc You were doing some something that was So maybe the analogy isn't quite right . Here the problem seems to be is that we don't have a hug a really huge net with a really huge amount of training data . But we have s f for this kind of task , I would think , sort of a modest amount . We have a modest amount of of  training data from a couple different conditions , and then  in yeah , that and the real situation is that there 's enormous variability that we anticipate in the test set in terms of language , and noise type  , and  , channel characteristic , sort of all over the map . And so , I 'm just concerned that we don't really have  , the data to train up  one of the things that we were seeing is that when we added in we still don't have a good explanation for this , but we are seeing that we 're adding in  , a fe few different databases and  the performance is getting worse and  , when we just take one of those databases that 's a pretty good one , it actually is is is is is better . And  that says to me , yes , that , you know , there might be some problems with the pronunciation models that some of the databases we 're adding in or something like that . But one way or another we don't have  , seemingly , the ability to represent , in the neural net of the size that we have , all of the variability that we 're gonna be covering . So that I 'm I 'm I 'm hoping that  , this is another take on the efficiency argument you 're making , which is I 'm hoping that with moderate size neural nets , that  if we if they look at more constrained conditions they they 'll have enough parameters to really represent them .  i i e The  I think it 's true that the OGI folk found that using LDA RASTA , which is a kind of LogRASTA , it 's just that they have the  it 's done in the log domain , as I recall , and it 's it  it 's just that they d it 's trained up , right ? That that  benefitted from on - line normalization . So will it be in our case , where we 're using the neural net ?  they they were not not using the neural net . We 've been sort of ignoring that , haven't we ? phd a: Yeah , so I don't know . professor d: But phd a: But we have to address the problem of CPU and memory we professor d: Yeah , but I li Well , I think My impression You you folks have been looking at this more than me . But my impression was that  , there was a a a a strict constraint on the delay , phd b: Yeah . professor d: but beyond that it was kind of that  using less memory was better , and using less CPU was better . We have to get some reference point to where we Well , what 's a reasonable number ? Perhaps be because if it 's if it 's too large or large or @ @ professor d: well I don't think we 're  completely off the wall .  I think that if we if we have  ,  the ultimate fall back that we could do If we find   we may find that we we 're not really gonna worry about the M L You know , if the MLP ultimately , after all is said and done , doesn't really help then we won't have it in . professor d: If the MLP does , we find , help us enough in some conditions , we might even have more than one MLP . professor d: And it 's  We do the other manipulations that we 're doing before that .  , what what are they What are they gonna be working Do we know what they 're gonna be working on while we take their features , phd a: They 're They 're starting to wor work on some kind of multi - band . Sunil , what was he doing , do you remember ? phd b: Sunil ? phd a: Yeah . He was doing something new or ? phd b: I I don't re I didn't remember . phd a: I think they were also mainly , well , working a little bit of new things , like networks and multi - band , but mainly trying to tune their their system as it is now to just trying to get the best from this this architecture . So I guess the way it would work is that you 'd get There 'd be some point where you say , " OK , this is their version - one " or whatever , and we get these VAD labels and features and so forth for all these test sets from them , phd a:   We have a certain level we try to improve it with this other path and then  , when it gets to be  , January some point  , we say , " OK we we have shown that we can improve this , in this way . So now   what 's your newest version ? " And then maybe they 'll have something that 's better and then we we 'd combine it .  I I I used to work with  folks who were trying to improve a good  ,  system with  with a neural net system and  , it was a common problem that you 'd Oh , and this Actually , this is true not just for neural nets but just for in general if people were working with  , rescoring  , N - best lists or lattices that come came from  , a mainstream recognizer .  , You get something from the the other site at one point and you work really hard on making it better with rescoring . So by the time you have  , improved their score , they have also improved their score phd a: Mmm . professor d: So , I guess at some point we 'll have to phd a: So it 's professor d: I I don't know . I think we 're we 're integrated a little more tightly than happens in a lot of those cases . I think at the moment they they say that they have a better thing we can we e e phd a: Mmm . professor d: What takes all the time here is that th we 're trying so many things , presumably  , in a in a day we could turn around  , taking a new set of things from them and and rescoring it , phd a: Mmm . I think that the most wide open thing is the issues about the  , you know , different trainings . So we we can for we c we can forget combining multiple features and MLG perhaps , professor d: That 's sort of wide open . phd a: or focus more on the targets and on the training data and ? professor d: Yeah , I think for right now  , I th I I really liked MSG . And I think that , you know , one of the things I liked about it is has such different temporal properties . And  , I think that there is ultimately a really good  , potential for , you know , bringing in things with different temporal properties .  , but  , we only have limited time and there 's a lot of other things we have to look at . professor d: And it seems like much more core questions are issues about the training set and the training targets , and fitting in  what we 're doing with what they 're doing , and , you know , with limited time . And then , you know , once we  , having gone through this process and trying many different things , I would imagine that certain things  , come up that you are curious about  , that you 'd not getting to and so when the dust settles from the evaluation  , I think that would time to go back and take whatever intrigued you most , you know , got you most interested  and  and and work with it , you know , for the next round .  , as you can tell from these numbers  , nothing that any of us is gonna do is actually gonna completely solve the problem . professor d: Well I figured that , but That what what what were you involved in in this primarily ? grad c: helping out  , preparing Well , they 've been kind of running all the experiments and stuff and I 've been  ,  w doing some work on the on the preparing all all the data for them to to  , train and to test on . Right now , I 'm I 'm focusing mainly on this final project I 'm working on in Jordan 's class . What 's what 's that ? grad c: I 'm trying to  So there was a paper in ICSLP about  this this multi - band  , belief - net structure . grad c:  basically it was two H M Ms with with a with a dependency arrow between the two H M professor d:  - huh . grad c: And so I wanna try try coupling them instead of t having an arrow that that flows from one sub - band to another sub - band . And  , I 'm just gonna see if if that that better models  ,  asynchrony in any way or  Yeah . OK , so speaking of which , if we don't have anything else that we need You happy with where we are ? phd a: Mmm . professor d: Know know wher know where we 're going ?  phd a: I think so , yeah . grad e: Al - actually I should mention So if  , about the Linux machine " Swede . grad e: And  Dan Ellis I believe knows something about using that machine so phd a: Mmm . grad e: If people are interested in in getting jobs running on that maybe I could help with that . phd a: Yeah , but I don't know if we really need now a lot of machines . professor d: Right ?  there 's there 's some different things that we 're trying to get at now . Yeah , as far as you can tell , you 're actually OK on C - on CPU  , for training and so on ? Yeah . Well , more is always better , but mmm , I don't think we have to train a lot of networks , now that we know We just select what works fine professor d: OK . to work professor d: And we 're OK on And we 're OK on disk ? phd a: and It 's OK , yeah . Alright , so  , since  , we didn't ha get a channel on for you , you don't have to read any digits but the rest of us will . We didn't  I think I won't touch anything cuz I 'm afraid of making the driver crash which it seems to do , pretty easily . OK , so we 'll  I 'll start off the   connect the phd a: My battery is low
professor f: So the what w we h have been doing i they would like us all to read these digits . grad b: OK and the way you do it is you just read the numbers not as  each single , so just like I do it . So we 're gonna try to finish by five so people who want to can go hear Nancy Chang 's talk ,  downstairs . professor f: And you guys are g giving talks on tomorrow and Wednesday lunch times , phd a: Yes . OK so , do y do you know what we 're gonna do ? grad b: I thought two things  we 'll introduce ourselves and what we do . And  we already talked with Andreas , Thilo and David and some lines of code were already written today and almost tested and just gonna say we have  again the recognizer to parser thing where we 're working on and that should be no problem and then that can be sort of developed  as needed when we get enter the tourism domain . phd a: S grad b: and  There one of our diligent workers has to sort of volunteer to look over Tilman 's shoulder while he is changing the grammars to English phd a:   Either we do a syllable concatenating  grammar for the English generation which is sort of starting from scratch and doing it the easy way , or we simply adopt the ah  more in - depth  style that is implemented in the German system and  are then able not only to produce strings but also the syntactic parse  not parse not the syntactic tree that is underneath in the syntactic structure which is the way we decided we were gonna go because A , it 's easier in the beginning phd a:   grad b: and  it does require some some knowledge of of those grammars and and and some ling linguistic background . Johno , are you gonna have some time t to do that  w with these guys ? grad e: Sure . And an Yeah , so I I actually wanna f to find out about it too , but I may not have time to get in . grad b: the the ultimate goal is that before they leave we we can run through the entire system input through output on at least one or two sample things . And  and by virtue of doing that then in this case Johno will have acquired the knowledge of how to extend it . grad b: And  also  Ralf has hooked up with David and you 're gonna continue either all through tonight or tomorrow on whatever to get the er parser interface working . grad b: They are thinning out and thickening out lattices and doing this kind of stuff to see what works best . grad d: Yeah , very much professor f: OK , before before you got put to work ? grad d: Yeah professor f: Great . OK , so that 's Sort of one branch is to get us caught up on what 's going on . Also of course it would be really nice to know what the plans are , in addition to what 's sort of already in code . professor f: and we can d I dunno w w was there  a time when we were set up to do that ? It probably will work better if we do it later in the week , after we actually understand  better what 's going on . professor f: So when do you guys leave ? phd a:  we 're here through Sunday , grad d: Oh phd a: so All through Friday would be fine . professor f: Oh , OK , so OK , So so anyt we 'll find a time later in the week to  get together and talk about your understanding of what SmartKom plans are . professor f: grad b: Should we already set a date for that ? Might be beneficial while we 're all here . I can do earlier in the day on Thursday , or  most of the time on Friday , not all . grad b: Thursday morning sounds fine ? professor f: Wha - but , Johno , phd a:   professor f: what are your constraints ? grad e:  Thursday afternoon doesn't work for me , but grad b: Neither does Thursday morning , no ? grad e:  Thursday morning should be fine . professor f: Eleven ? Eleven on Thursday ? grad e: I was just thinking I w I will have leavened by eleven . grad b: but  David is here and he 's actually knows everything about the SmartKom recognizer . grad b: OK so facing to to what we 've sort of been doing here  well for one thing we 're also using this room to collect data . grad b: no not meeting data but sort of sort ah our version of a wizard experiment such not like the ones in Munich but pretty close to it . grad b: The major difference to the Munich ones is that we do it via the telephone phd a: OK . grad b: even though all the recording is done here and so it 's a sort of a computer call system that gives you tourist information phd a:   and part of that is sort of trying to find out whether people change their linguistic verbal behavior when first thinking they speak to a machine and then to a human . grad b: and we 're setting it up so that we can we hope to implant certain intentions in people . For example  we have first looked at a simple sentence that " How do I get to the Powder - Tower ? " OK so you have the castle of Heidelberg phd a: OK . grad b: and  so What will you parse out of that sentence ? Probably something that we specified in M - three - L , that is @ @ " action go to whatever domain , object whatever Powder - Tower " . grad b: And maybe some model will tell us , some GPS module , in the mobile scenario where the person is at the moment . And  we 've sort of gone through that once before in the Deep Mail project and we noticed that first of all what are I should 've brought some slides , but what our So here 's the tower . And our system led people here , to a point where they were facing a wall in front of the tower . There is no entrance there , but it just happens to be the closest point of the road network to the geometric center Because that 's how the algorithm works . So we took out that part of the road network as a hack and then it found actually the way to the entrance . But what we actually observed in Heidelberg is that most people when they want to go there they actually don't want to enter , because it 's not really interesting . grad b: And so what   a s you s let 's say a simple parse from a s from an utterance won't really give us is what the person actually wants . Does he wanna go there to see it ? Does he wanna go there now ? Later ? How does the person wanna go there ? Is that person more likely to want to walk there ? Walk a scenic route ? and so forth . There are all kinds of decisions that we have identified in terms of getting to places and in terms of finding information about things . And we are constructing and then we 've identified more or less the extra - linguistic parameters that may f play a role . And we also want to look closely on the linguistic information that what we can get from the utterance . That 's part of why we implant these intentions in the data collection to see whether people actually phrase things differently whether they want to enter in order to buy something or whether they just wanna go there to look at it . And  so the idea is to construct   suitable interfaces and a belief - net for a module that actually tries to guess what the underlying intention was . And then enrich or augment the M - three - L structures with what it thought what more it sort of got out of that utterance . So if it can make a good suggestion , " Hey ! " you know , " that person doesn't wanna enter . That person just wants to take a picture , " cuz he just bought film , or " that person wants to enter because he discussed the admission fee before " . Or " that person wants to enter because he wants to buy something and that you usually do inside of buildings " and so forth . These ah these types of  these bits of additional information are going to be embedded into the M - three - L structure in an sort of subfield that we have reserved . If not you know , then that 's also something  that we can't really at least we want to offer the extra information . grad b:  t s Ultimately if you have if you can offer that information , somebody 's gonna s do something with it sooner or later . grad e: What was he saying ? grad b: for example , right now I know the GIS from email is not able to calculate these viewpoints . So that 's a functionality that doesn't exist yet to do that dynamically , phd a:   grad b: but if we can offer it that distinction , maybe somebody will go ahead and implement it . Surely nobody 's gonna go ahead and implement it if it 's never gonna be used , so . What have I forgotten about ? Oh yeah , how we do it , professor f: Well th  grad b: yeah that 's the professor f: No no . I s I see questions on peoples ' faces , so why don't phd a: Oh professor f: let 's let 's Let 's hear phd a: Well the obvious one would be if if you envision this as a module within SmartKom , where exactly would that Sit ? That 's the d grad b:  so far I 've thought of it as sort of adding it onto the modeler knowledge module . grad b: but it could sit anywhere in the attention - recognition  basically this is what attention - recognition literally sort of can phd a: Well it 's supposed to do . phd a: Well f from my understanding of what the people at Phillips were originally trying to do doesn't seem to quite fit into SmartKom currently so what they 're really doing right now is only selecting among the alternatives , the hypotheses that they 're given enriched by the domain knowledge and the  discourse modeler and so on . Is there other other things that cuz we wanna not Pa - pass over any you know , questions or concerns that you have . phd a: Well there 're there 're two levels of of giving an answer and I guess on both levels I don't have any  further questions . phd a:  the the two levels will be as far as I 'm concerned as  standing here for the generation module grad d: Mmm . phd a: and the other is is my understanding of what SmartKom  is supposed to be professor f: Right . phd a: and I I think that fits in perfectly professor f: So well , let me Let me s expand on that a little bit from the point of view of the generation . professor f: So the idea is that we 've actually got this all laid out an and we could show it to you ig  Robert didn't bring it today but there 's a a belief - net which is There 's a first cut at a belief - net that that doesn't it isn't fully  instantiated , and in particular some of the the combination rules and ways of getting the the conditional probabilities aren't there . professor f: There are only three possibilities and the  what one would like is for this  , knowledge modeling module to add which of those it is and give it to the planner . professor f: But ,  th the current design suggests that if it seems to be an important decision and if the belief - net is equivocal so that it doesn't say that one of these is much more probable than the other , then an option is to go back and ask for the information you want . For the debugging we 'll probably just have a a drop - down menu and the while you 're debugging you will just OK . But for a full system , then one might very well formulate a query , phd a:   professor f: give it to the dialogue planner and say this , you know ar are you know you are you planning to enter ? Or whatever it whatever that might be . So that 's under that model then , There would be a   a loop in which this thing would formulate a query , phd a: Yes . professor f: OK so , th that  , We probably won't do this early on , because the current focus is more on the decision making and stuff like that . professor f: But While we 're on the subject I just wanted to give you a sort of head 's up that it could be that some months from now we said " OK we 're now ready to try to close that loop " in terms of querying about some of these decisions . So my suggestion then is that you  look into the currently ongoing discussion about how the action plans are supposed to look like . And they 're currently  Agreeing or or in the process of agreeing on an X M L - ification of  something like a state - transition network of how dialogues would proceed . D did you know this Robert ? grad b:  Michael is doing that , right ? phd a: Well  Marcus Lerkult is actually implementing that stuff and Marcus and Michael together are  leading the discussion there , yeah . professor f: And it may be that that  we should early on make sure that they have the flexibility that we need . But they  Have I understood this right ? They they govern more or less the the dialogue behavior or the action phd a:   grad b: It 's not really what you do with the content of the dialogue but it 's So ,  there is this this this nice interf grad d: No , it 's it 's also a quantrant   grad b: i Is it professor f: So there 's ac so there th the word " action " , OK , is is what 's ambiguous here . professor f: So ,  one thing is there 's an actual planner that tells the person in the tourist domain now , phd a: OK . professor f: per tells the person how to go , " First go here , grad d:   So that 's that form of planning , and action , and a route planner and GIS , all sort of stuff . No , in SmartKom terminology that 's  called a function that 's modeled by a function modeler . That 's simply a functionality that you give data as in a query and then you get back from that mmm , a functioning model  which might be a planner or a VCR or whatever . professor f: I think tha I think it 's not going to I think that 's not going to be good enough . So I think the idea of having a , you know , transition diagram for the grammar of conversations is a good idea . professor f: OK ? And I think that we do hav definitely have to get in on it and find out OK . But I think that  when so , when you get to the tourist domain it 's not just an information retrieval system . professor f: Right ? So this i this is where I think this people are gonna have to think this through a bit more carefully . professor f: So , if it 's only like in in the in the film and T V thing , OK , you can do this . professor f: y y your I d I think the notion of this as a self contained  module you know th the functional module that that interacts with with where the tourism g stuff is going probably is too restrictive . professor f: Now I dunno how much people have thought ahead to the tourist domain in this phd a: Probably not enough ,  an another  more basic point there is that the current  tasks and therefore th the concepts in this ac what 's called the action plan and what 's really the dialogue manager . professor f: Yeah phd a:  is based on slots that have to be filled and the  kind of values in these slots would be fixed things like the a time or a movie title or something like this professor f:   phd a: and I 'm not sure if if complex slots of that type are really  being taken into consideration . phd a: So that 's that 's really something we professor f: Could you could you put a message into the right place to see if we can at least ask that question ? phd a:   phd a:  nothing 's being completely settled there grad b: rea yep phd a: so this is really an ongoing discussion grad b:  -  phd a: and that 's grad b: yeah and  it might actually OK ah also because  again in in Deep Map we have faced and implemented those problems once already phd a:   grad b: And  mmm You don't know OK th I 'll I 'll talk to Michael it 's what I do anyway . Who How far is the  the the M - three - L specification for for the la natural language input gone on the the  I haven't seen anything for the  tourist path domain . grad b: right ?  together with the usual gang ,  Petra and Jan grad d: Mmm . Yeah , there 's a meeting next next week I think grad b: OK because That 's Those are the I think the the true key issues is how does the whatever comes out of the language input pipeline look like and then what the action planner does with it and how that is  specified . I didn't think of the internal working of the  the action planner and the language  the function model as sort of relevant . But  the internal workings of of the whether you know there 're dialogue action planners that work with belief - nets that are action planners that work with you know state automata .  it does matter because it does have to keep track of you we are on part six of r a route that consists of eight steps and so forth phd a: Right . OK , so that  , for example , the i it 's the action planner is going to take some spec and s make some suggestions about what the user should do . What the user says after that is going to be very much caught up with what the action planner told it . professor f: If the If the parser and the language end doesn't know what the person 's been told OK th it 's you 're making your life much more difficult than it has to be . professor f: Right ? So if someone says the best t to  go there is by taxi , let 's say . OK , there 's all sorts of dialogues that won't make any sense which would be just fine . professor f:  phd a: That would b but that I think that that  point has been realized and it 's it 's not really  been defined yet but there 's gonna be some kind of feedback and input from  the action planner into all the analysis modules , telling them what to expect and what the current state of the discourse is . professor f: Yeah , but this is not the st this is not just the state of the discourse . professor f: OK so it z and s  , It 's great if people are already taking that into account . professor f:  I think you 're gonna need We talked about this several times that that the the input end is gonna need a fair amount of feedback from the planning end . phd a:  professor f: In in one of these things which are are much more continuous than the just the dialogue over movies and stuff . phd a: And even on on a more basic level the the action planner actually needs to be able to have  an expressive power that can deal with these structures . And not just  say   the dialogue  will consist of ten possible states and th these states really are fixed in in a certain sense . professor f:  ? phd a: You have to professor f: Would there be any chance of getting the terminology changed so that the dialogue planner was called a " dialogue planner " ? Because there 's this other thing The o There 's this other thing in in the tourist domain which is gonna be a route planner phd a: That 'd be nice . professor f: Huh ? So , s So what would happen if we sent a note saying " Gee we 've talked about this and couldn't we change this  th the whole word ? " I have no idea how complicated these things are . phd a: and I think this is just for historical reasons within  , the preparation phase of the project and not because somebody actually believes it ought to be action planner . So if there is resistance against changing it , that 's just because " Oh , We don't want to change things . professor f: Yeah , but that 's not g eh tha That ha has all the wrong connotations . I think you can't it 's fine for looking up when T you know when the show 's on TV . You go to th but I I I I think it 's really really wrong headed for something that you that has a lot of state , it 's gonna interact co in a complicated way with the  understanding parts . Yeah I think just the the spatial planner and the route planner I showed you once the interac action between them among them in the deep map system professor f: Right . grad b: so a printout of the communication between those two fills up I don't know how many pages phd a:  grad b: and that 's just part of how do I get to one place . Markus phd a: Wh - where 's ? grad b: Is he new in the in the ? phd a: Yeah , he 's he started  I think January . grad b: Is he gonna continue with the old  thing ? phd a: No , no he 's completely gonna rewrite everything . grad b: Yes I was just that 's my next question phd a:  grad b: whether we 're we 're gonna stick to Prolog or not . grad b: OK But I do think the the function modeling concept has a certain makes sense in a in a certain light phd a: Yeah . grad b: because the action planner should not be or the dialogue manager in that case should not  w have to worry about whether it 's interfacing with  something that does route planning in this way or that way phd a:   grad b: and it cant sort of formulate its what it wants in a in a rather a abstract  way , you know f " Find me a good route for this . grad b: It doesn't really have to worry ab how route planner A or how route planner B actually wants it . It 's tricky because one could well imagine I think it will turn out to be the case that  , this thing we 're talking about , th the extended n  knowledge modeler will fill in some parameters about what the person wants . One could well imagine that the next thing that 's trying to fill out the detailed  , route planning , let 's say , will also have questions that it would like to ask the user . You could well imagine you get to a point where it 's got a a choice to make and it just doesn't know something . grad b:  professor f: And a I a a good design would would allow that to happen . professor f: If if you know if if you can't make it happen then you you do your best . phd a: Yeah but that doesn't necessarily contradict  an architecture where there really is a pers a def well - defined interface . But but what it nee but th what the point is the in that case the dialogue manager is sort of event driven . So the dialogue manager may think it 's in a dialogue state of one sort , phd a:   professor f: and this one of these planning modules comes along and says " hey , right now we need to ask a question " . phd a: Sure , professor f: It could be y phd a: ye yeah I I think that 's that 's the  concept that people have , professor f: Yeah , yeah it it phd a: yep . phd a: And and the the underlying idea of course is that there is something like kernel modules with kernel functionality that you can plug  certain applications like tourist information or  the home scenario with  controlling a VCR and so on . So wouldn't That 's an additional reason to have this well - defined interface and keep these things like  tourist information external . phd a: But of course the the more complex grad b: Yeah , there is another philosophical issue that I think you know you can evade phd a: yep . grad b: but , at at least it makes sense to me that sooner or later  a service is gonna come and describe itself to you . and that 's sort of what Srini is working on in in in the DAML  project where  you you find a GIS about that gives you information on Berkeley , phd a: Yeah . grad b: and it 's it 's gonna be there and tell you what it can do and how it wants to do things . and so you can actually interface to such a system without ever having met it before and the function modeler and a self - description of the  external service haggle it out phd a:  . grad b: and you can use the same language core , understanding core to interface with planner - A , planner - B , planner - C and so forth . grad b: Which is , you know ,   utopian completely utopian at the moment , but slowly , you know , getting into the realm of the  contingent . And language input for example , is of course  crucial you know also when you do the sort of deep understanding analysis that we envision .  Then of course , the   , you know what is it poverty of the stimulus , yet the m  the less we get of that the better . and  so we we 're thinking , for example how much syntactic analysis actually happens already in the parser . Yeah , are there currently is  no syntactic analysis but in the next release there will be some . grad d: unless professor f: How 's it grad d: and it 's   you can access this professor f: S so  y we we looked at the e current pattern matching thing .  , So what are what are the plans roughly ? grad d:  it 's to to integrate and syntactic analysis . So then an utter more than one utterance is There  there 's often  pause between it and a segmentation occurs .  professor f: So , the  So the idea is to  have a pa y y a particular grad d: yeah professor f: Do you have a particular parser in mind ? Is it  partic d  have you thought through ? Is it an HPSG parser ? Is it a whatever ? grad d: No no it 's  I think it 's it 's totally complicated for it 's just one one person professor f: OK . grad d: and so I have to keep the professor f: Oh , you have to do it . grad d: ah and so things must be simpler professor f: I see , grad d: but  , Miel syntactic analysis with  finite state transducers . grad d: Yeah ,  the problem is th that it has to be very fast because  if you want to for more than one path anywhere professor f: OK . grad d: what 's in the latches from the speech recognizer professor f:   So ,  So there was a chunk parser in Verbmobil , that was one of the  branchers . And I know one of them was a chunk parser and I don't remember who did that . grad b: A Alan ? grad d: I think it 's that might , at Tuebingen I thought . grad d: was Do you know something about that ? phd a: Tubingen was at least involved in putting the chunks together grad d: In Tub - at phd a: I can't quite recall whether they actually produced the chunks in the first place . phd a: Or wh grad d: Oh from from Stuttgart , professor f: There w That 's right . They w They had There were This was done with a two phase thing , where the chunk parser itself was pretty stupid grad d: yeah , also professor f: and then there was a kind of trying to fit them together that h used more context . Yeah professor f: Right ? phd a: Well you s and and especially you did some some  , l  was a learning - based approach which learned from a big corpus of of trees . phd a: And yes the it the chunk parser was a finite - state machine that  Mark Light originally w worked on in while he was in Tuebingen professor f: Right . professor f: But is that the kind of thing y It sounds like the kind of thing that you were thinking of . yeah that 's In this direction , yes professor f: What ? grad d: Yeah , it 's in in this direction . grad b: From Michael Strube , I 've heard very good stuff about the chunk parser that is done by FORWISS , which is in embassy doing the parsing . grad b: So this is sort of came as a surprise to me that you know , embassy s is featuring a nice parser but it 's what I hear . grad b: And they 're doing chunk parsing and it 's  I I can give you the names of the people who do it there . But But  given th the constraints , that you want it to be small and fast and so forth , my guess is you 're probably into some kind of chunk parsing . And  I 'm not a big believer in this  statistical you know , cleaning up  It That seems to me kind of a last resort if  you can't do it any other way . professor f: There is this this one that they did at SRI some years ago Fastus ? grad d:  professor f: a grad d: yeah , I 've I 've looked at it but but it 's no not much  information available . I found , professor f: ah ! grad d: but it 's also finite - state transducers , I thought . grad d: and professor f: And of course it was English oriented , grad d: Yeah , and and Purely finite - state transducers are not so good for German since there 's  professor f:  w Right . grad d: The word order is is  not fixed professor f: Yeah , I guess that 's the point is is all the morphology and stuff . Also it 's  it 's  Yes ,  the  choice between  this processing and that processing and my template matcher . grad d:  professor f: So what about  Did y like Morfix ? a a e y you 've got stemmers ? Or is that something that grad d: yeah but it 's all in the in the lexicon . So it 's professor f: But did you have that ? grad d: Yeah th the information is available . So , but grad d: So professor f: So y you just connect to the lexicon grad d: Yeah professor f: and  at least for German you have all all of the  the stemming information . grad d: It  professor f: Did we look at the German ? I don't remember . professor f: So w wha phd a: n Well I think I think there 's some misunderstanding here professor f: i phd a: it 's Morphix is not used on - line . phd a: s so the lexicon might be derived by Morphix grad d: What ? phd a: but What what 's happening on - line is just   a a retrieval from the lexicon which would give all the stemming information professor f: Right . professor f: What  I didn't reme grad b: We threw out all the forms professor f: Huh ? grad b: because , you know , English , well professor f: Oh OK , so it yeah , s s I thought I 'd grad d:   professor f: So in German then you actually do case matching and things like in the in the pattern matcher or not ? grad d:  Not yet but it 's planned to do that . grad d: Yeah professor f: Have we looked at the German ? Oh , I haven yeah that 's getting it from the lexicon is just fine . In terms of if you 're trying to build some fast parser and so forth and You really might wanna do it in a significantly different way . So you 've you guys have looked at this ? also ? in terms of You know , w if you 're doing this for English as well as German  Do you think now that it would be this doing it similarly ? grad d:  Yeah , it 's  I think it 's  yes , it 's it 's  possible to to do list processing . grad b: Well there 's m I 'm sure there 's gonna be more discussion on that after your talk . grad d:  -  , grad b: We 're just gonna foreshadow what we saw that grad d: yeah . grad b: and  professor f: Now actually ,  Are you guys free at five ? Or Do you have to go somewhere at five o ' clock tonight ? W in ten minutes ? grad d: Ah phd a:   I think we 're expect grad d: mmm . professor f: That 's good , because that will  tell you a fair amount about The form of semantic construction grammar that we 're using . professor f: so So I th I think that probably as good an introduction as you 'll get . professor f: It won't talk particularly about how that relates to what  Robert was saying at the beginning . So we talked about the fact that There 're going to be a certain number of decisions That you want the knowledge modeler to make , that will be then fed to the function module , that does  , route planning . And then one half of this we talked about at little bit is how if you had the right information , if you knew something about what was said and about th the something about was the agent a tourist or a native or a business person or  young or old , whatever . That information , and also about the  , what we 're calling " the entity " , Is it a castle , is it a bank ? Is it a s town square , is it a statue ? Whatever . But the other half of the problem is How would you get that kind of information from the parsed input ? So ,  So what you might try to do is just build more templates , saying  we 're trying to build a templ you know build a template that w  somehow would capture the fact that he wants to take a picture . But  from our point of view this is also a research project and there are a couple of people not here for various reasons who are doing doctoral dissertations on this , phd a:   professor f: and the idea that we 're really after is a very deep semantics based on cognitive linguistics and the notion that there are a relatively small number of primitive conceptual schemas that characterize a lot of activity . But also , importantly for Lakoff and these guys is all sorts of metaphorical things are also characterized this way . professor f: and so s So , what we 're really trying to do is to map from the discourse to the conceptual semantics level . professor f: So another one of these primitive , what are called " image schemas " , is  goal seeking . professor f: And that all sorts of things , particularly in the tourist domain , can be represented in terms of  source , path and goal . So the idea would be could we build an analyser that would take an utterance and say " Aha ! th this utterance is talking about an attempt to reach a goal . The goal is this , the pers the ,  traveller is that ,  the sor w where we are at now is is this , they 've mentioned possible obstacles , et cetera . So if you can do this , then the notion would be that across a very large range of domains , you could use this deep conceptual basis as the interface . professor f: And then ,  The processing of that , both on the input end , recognizing that certain words in a language talk about containers or goals , et cetera , and on the output end , given this kind of information , you can then  make decisions about what actions to take . professor f: And Nancy is going to Her talk is going to be not about using this in applications , but about modeling how children might learn this kind of  deep semantic grammar . Would it be highly ambiguous if and then there would be another module that takes that  highly underspecified deep semantic construction and map it onto the current context to find out what the person really was talking about in that context . or or a professor f: Well that 's that 's that 's where the belief - net comes in . professor f: So part of what you 'll get out of this will be the fact tha w if it works right , OK , that this is an agent that wants to go to this place and that 's their goal phd a:   professor f: OK , phd a: th professor f: part of it comes from the ontology . professor f: And the idea of the belief - net is it combines the information from the dialogue which comes across in this general way , phd a:   professor f: you know this is a this is a goal seeking behavior , along with specific information from the ontology about the kinds of objects involved phd a: Yeah OK , Yeah , yep yep yep yep professor f: and about the situation about " Is it raining ? " I don't know . professor f: And so th the coupling to the situation comes in this model from , at th at th at the belief - net , combining evidence from the dialogue with the ontology with the situation . professor f: But Nancy isn't gonna talk about that , phd a: Yeah , oh yeah , I see , professor f: just about the  phd a: yeah yeah , really . phd g: Is it i in , then , your place , in five five - A ? phd a: Alright .
Item 2, then, this morning is an evidence session to scrutinise the Welsh Government's progress in developing the new curriculum for Wales. I'm very pleased to welcome Kirsty Williams AM, Minister for Education; Steve Davies, director of the education directorate; and Claire Bennett, who is deputy director for curriculum and assessment. Thank you all for attending this morning, and thank you for the paper that you provided in advance to the committee. We've got a lot of ground to cover, so if it's okay, we'll go straight into questions. If I can just start by asking you what the main messages are that you've received during the feedback period on the draft curriculum. If I may, I think it's important to understand what the level of that feedback has been. So, there was a concerted effort and a plan drawn up to try and ensure that there was as much engagement, knowledge and opportunity as possible. So, working through the regional consortia, approximately 120 separate events were organised, and we believe that in the region of 6,000 headteachers, teachers, governors and teaching assistants have actually had an opportunity to participate in those events. We also held a number of focus group sessions specifically for young people themselves, so that they could give us their feedback. We'll all be familiar, won't we, with the narrative of, 'Oh, we're sending people out into the world of business without the skills that we as an employer are looking for'. So we thought it was really important to engage business so that they can have their say and their input into the process. And obviously we work very hard on making it as easy as possible via new technology for people to have their say. So, Members, I'm sure, will have been aware of the specific pages on Hwb that outlined the draft curriculum, and we had 275,000 unique visits to the Hwb curriculum pages. It's really interesting to see the breakdown of the areas of learning and experiencewhich particular AoLEs were the most popular and were being looked at the mostwith our creative and performing arts and the creativity and the expressive arts being the most popular. So that's really interesting that people really wanted to engage in the content of that particular AoLE. What, then, have people said to us? Well, I'm really pleased that there has been broad support for the curriculum changes that we are proposing. There's real support for the need for change, because that's the first question, actually; why are we doing this, and why do we need to change? So, support for the need for change, and lots of support for the principle of a purpose-led curriculum. Strong support for greater autonomy and agency for the professionso, the ability of the profession to take a framework and then truly let them adapt it to meet the needs of the children that they are working with in their communities. In terms of some of the things that people are asking us to look again at, some of that is around some of the language used. Can we clarify, can we simplify in some areas, are there things that are repeated in a variety of AoLEs? Can we use that as an overarching, rather than repeating ourselves? Can we simplify it and clarify some of the language? Also, in some areas. It's interesting; in some areas people want it simplified and cut down, but in other areas, people say, 'Well actually, in this bit of it, we need a bit more detail, and a bit more depth and clarity'. That process has already started, but considering that this is a massive change, I have been hugely encouraged, actually, by the high levels of engagement and support for the broad principles of what we're doing. Are you able to give the committee any early indication of what level of change you anticipate making to the guidance? kirsty williams am: I think what's really important and what has been the strength of the process to date is that we are not doing this to our profession, we are doing it with our profession. So, in the spirit of co-construction, the reflection on the feedback will continue to be primarily led by the existing infrastructure that we already had that got us to this stage at present.So, Members will be aware that we've slightly changed the model. Pioneers were asked if they wanted to continue in that process and to put themselves forward, and we've narrowed that down now to a smaller group of innovative schools. But above and beyond the innovative schools, we looked at individuals who have specific expertise in subject areas, and they're the first part of that process. So, they met last week to begin looking at the feedback, and we'll continue to use the processes that we have to reflect and refine. Opportunities to do things better, explain things better, simplify where possible, where we've been told that that needs to happen, provide greater depth where we've been told that needs to happenabsolutely. We're definitely very alive and very willing to engage in those, but in terms of the overall concept, then no, no significant changes. And what are the steps now before the final curriculum is published in January 2020? kirsty williams am: Okay. We call themit's not a very nice namequality improvement practitioners, the QI practitioners. In October, there will be a number of workshops lasting three days at a time where those practitioners will continue that process of feedback with our curriculum and assessment group and all those people involved. By November, we would expect the QI groups to have completed their work and would want them to be in a position to hand over the refinements to an editorial process, and that has to be done in both languages. I think it's really important that we don't do it in English and then we simply translate it into Welsh. It also, then, hands over to the publication team to do all the work on the publication, our website team will then be working on it, and then we would expect final publication in Januaryam I right, Claire? claire bennett: Yes. sian gwenllian am: You've touched on the point that there's going to be some sort of change, and you've mentioned in your paper to us that further specific aspects of the framework of the curriculum are going to be included in the primary legislation. kirsty williams am: The original proposal that we began working on was, in the legislation, to provide for the four purposesso, the four purposes would be set out in the legislationas well as putting in law the areas of learning and experience that you'll all be familiar with. Then, below that, we were going to legislate for a number of the cross-curricular aspectsso, the literacy, the numeracy and the digital competencyas well as some elements where we had already said that we were going to make that statutory, so, for instance, above and beyond what Graham Donaldson would have put in his original reports. I've already made an announcement that I was going to put RSE on the face of the Bill. So, the two main new areas that we are now working on to include within the Bill are to ensure that there is breadth within the curriculum for everybody. Rather than simply, in law, leaving it at the AoLE level, we'll be bringing it down again to the 'what matters' statements within that, again, providing greater certainty and greater clarity about our expectations at a national level. We'll also be looking to include in the legislation provision for a statutory framework setting out our approach to progression in each of the AoLE areas. So, there has been in the ChamberI can see Suzy is writing this downSuzy has asked me questions about, 'How do you create a national expectation around progression?' We've reflected on that and our conversations with other people outside during this process, so we would look to have a statutory framework where our expectations of progression at a national level would be laid out. One of the consistent worries that some people have had, whilst being very supportive of the overall aims, is how do you get that balance between individual autonomy in the school, but also ensure that there is some national expectation and that the variation on these important things is not so great as to cause concern. I set up a processthis was an open process, and we were open to listening to people. So, I think those will be the two main areas where we hadn't originally thought that we would legislate for, but that we will now legislate for. I haven't got the 'what matters'statements in front of me kirsty williams am: Well, if you remember, we have the four purposes, and then we have the areas of learning and experience, and then, below the areas of learning and experience are the broad concepts that we would expect to be delivered in each of those areas of learning and experience. Some of the feedback that we've had is that sian gwenllian am: So, will you be adding to those? kirsty williams am: Adding is not necessarilyno, not adding. But, for instance, the children have given us some interesting feedback about what they feel really matters in those areas of learning and experience. So, they'll be refined, but not added to, and then we will legislate for them, and that hadn't been the original intention. Will they include mental health and well-being? kirsty williams am: Well, the area of learning and experience for well-being is already there, and underneath that area of learning title, there are the broad concepts of what matters, what we believe matters, in that area of learning, and it is that that we will now actually put into the legislation. Sorry, I'm not helping, because I haven't got them with me either to read them out. lynne neagle am: They are in the annex to the paper, Sin, and, obviously, mental health is in there. So, just to clarify, then, that would mean that every school would have to teach mental health by law. kirsty williams am: Yes, because the 'what matters' states very clearly the broad concepts in health and well-being. It refers to both physical and mental health, and we intend to legislate to ensure that the 'what matters' statements are a set given in the system. kirsty williams am: Claire, am I explaining it okay? claire bennett: Yes, the 'what matters' are the articulation of the big ideas. So, the idea is to make sure that those are consistent, and then that still leaves huge flexibility underneath as to how to approach those, which particular topics to select in how to actually teach them. But the concept that you might not do one 'what matters'it was never what was intended. They won't be literally in the Bill, because, obviously, you might want to change the emphasis, so that'll be provided for in subordinate legislation, but the provision will be there, and they will have the status of something that's not optional, basically, for a school. sian gwenllian am: Therefore, it's not going to be on the face of the Billthe mental health aspect, for example. You're saying that it's subordinate, but then you're saying kirsty williams am: So, on the face of the Bill, we will make provision to say that the 'what matters' statements have to be delivered. So the actual wording of the 'what matters' statements will be in secondary legislation; the need to deliver and the requirement, the legal requirement to deliver the 'what matters' statement, will be on the face of the Bill. If I think, if we had sat here 20 years ago, we probably, in a 'what matters' statement on health and well-being, wouldn't have referred to mental health, 20 years ago, because our understanding as a society, our willingness as a society to engage in that. So, if we had drawn up a 'what matters' statement even a decade ago, I suspect we wouldn't have talked about mental health. So, the concept of having to deliver the 'what matters' statement will be in the primary legislation; the actual wording, because otherwise if you wanted to change it you'd have to go through the entire process. The actual need and the compulsion, the expectation that you have to do that, will be on the face of the Bill. The point you've made is one that Government has made with other legislation prior to this, but can I just ask you to consider the worthiness, if you like, or the good purpose of actually putting the wording of the 'what matters' statements, the first round of those, in the primary legislation on the basis that they can be amended through affirmative procedure secondary legislation when they need changing in due course? The reason I ask this is just to explain to the population of Wales that there is certainty at the first step, bearing in mind that it will change over the yearsI completely accept that. But when you're amending primary legislation, you don't have to go through the whole process againyou can do it via secondary legislation provided the correct powers are put in the primary legislation to do that. kirsty williams am: Yes, as I said, I think we've demonstrated that we're listening to people, that there has been concern expressed about certainty and having a national approach on some of these issues, and we have taken steps to address that and we'll continue to reflect, but, crucially, we'll continue to reflect with our partners who are co-constructing this with us. And I think the important thing to remember is that it's not Ministers or civil servants that are necessarily drawing up these 'what matters' statements, it is practitioners themselves, guided by experts in the field that are not teachers, that have come up with these things. Obviously, the Bill will presumably come to this committee kirsty williams am: We're assuming so. sian gwenllian am: Moving on, therefore, to the religious education and relationships and sexuality education, I understand that you've had numerous responses to the White Paper surrounding this particular area. What are the main points that were raised with you and how do you intend to respond to what's been said? kirsty williams am: Well, these two areas certainly have ensured that lots of people have responded. It's interesting that people are far more interested in what we may or may not do about these two subjects than maths, English, Welsh, science, but there we go; I guess it's the nature of the areas that we're talking about. With regard to religious education, we had a significant number of people that have expressed concerns about our approaches towards RE that were set out in the White Paper. There were very mixed views on the inclusion of a range of faiths and world religions included in that area of learning. Many people said that there needed to be a much clearer and strongerand in some cases exclusivefocus on Christianity, as opposed to including other world religions and, indeed, non-religious views. There were people who thought that RE shouldn't be compulsory at all and therefore our proposals to ensure that RE was compulsory, people objected to that, on the other. Of those respondents that agreed that RE should be a compulsory part of the curriculum, or were neutraldidn't express an opinion either way, but were neutral on the questionthe issues that they were bringing forward were: a need for learners, as they saw it, to be prepared to be part of a diverse and multicultural society. So, they wanted RE to be much more broad-based and encompassing of world views and world religions. They felt that that was an important part of preparing a young person to live in a world that is, as you say, diverse with people of different views living in it. There is certainly a need to modernise RE; some people perceived the current curriculum as a bit old-fashioned. And also there was much feedback on making sure that the profession was ready to deliver a renewed, modernised RE curriculum. So, those are the issues around religious education sian gwenllian am: Can I just? Before you go on to the next sectionis there evidence that this was a co-ordinated lobby to present a particular view and what is your response going to be to this? Obviously, there are always going to be lobbies presenting particular viewpoints. Our role, as politicians, is to lead, obviously, isn't it? kirsty williams am: Yes. Claire, would you say that it was a co-ordinated response? claire bennett: It wasn't a campaign in the sense of it being completely consistent, but, certainly, I think people with a particular interest in this issues felt galvanised to respond to the White Paper on this issueon this one and on relationships and sex education. And your response? kirsty williams am: And my response: well, clearly, Sin, I need to consider those responses, and both for RE and RSE, I shall be making a statement in the near future of our intentions on how to respond to these issues. With regard to RSE, the key messages, again, are focused on whether children should be taught RSE at all and that this should not be in the curriculum and it shouldn't be a compulsory part of the curriculumthat this was not an area where the school system and the education system should be involved, and that it should be alone the preserve of parents to teach children about issues around relationships and sexuality education. There were some issues raised about potential challenges with staff in talking about issues that they perhaps personally did not agree with with regard to this curriculum. With regard to guaranteed access to a full curriculum, there were strong views that, again, it should be parents, and parents alone, that made decisions about whether their children should have access to the entirety of the curriculum rather than schools or the state setting those rules. I think if we are to achieve the four purposes, and that's how we have always got to think about it, and if we agree that those are the kind of people and individuals we want leaving our compulsory education systemhow do we achieve those purposes? How are they healthy, confident individuals? How are we to prepare our children to be ethical, informed citizens of Wales and the world? So, we will reflect on what has come back to us, but I do believe that these are important aspects of the curriculum, if we are to achieve the four purposes. You've also mentioned that there will be a final draft of the curriculum at the start of next year. What is the timetable for the Bill itself and for seeking Royal Assent for that? kirsty williams am: Okay, so, as I said earlier, the expectation is that we will publish a final version of the curriculum in January 2020, so schools will then have the opportunity to be really engaging in it. I have to say, I'm in schools most weeks, and many, many, many schools are already taking the opportunity, even on the draft, to begin to think about planning and, indeed, changing what they're doing in schools. I'm overwhelmed, actually, by the enthusiasm of the sector to embrace what is a massive change for them. sian gwenllian am: actually implemented in September kirsty williams am: In 2022. kirsty williams am: And I think what's really important is that we get the actual curriculum out in January itself, because that's the bit that schools are really concerned about, and then we will have the process here to underpin it. We've got some questions now on potential unintended consequences, and other matters relating to that, from Hefin David. hefin david am: Can I ask what value you place on the work done by the Wales Institute of Social and Economic Research, Data and Methods and the presentation so far and the paper to be presented by Dr Nigel Newton? kirsty williams am: I alwaysand Welsh Government are big supporters of WISERD and the work that they do, and, in fact, we need more research into Welsh education, not less. I think what's really important in perhaps this piece of work is to say that I hope that, in the time where I've had an influence to influence over Welsh education, either as a backbencher or now as a Minister, equality and principles of equity have always driven what I've tried to achieve. And I would never undertake a policy reform that I thought would lead to less equity in the Welsh education system. Closing the attainment gap is a core element of the national mission for education in Wales and we would not proceed with anything that we thought could lead to an exacerbation of an achievement gap. And how do you respond, then? , it's a balanced paper, it looks at pros and cons and there's a mixed picture from it. How do you respond to the specific statement that Dr Nigel Newton said that the curriculum could exacerbate segregation within schools between different groups of pupils? kirsty williams am: Well, I think what the paper acknowledges is that there is no evidence that that will happen. These are 'coulds' and 'maybes' and things that we need, as a Government, to take into consideration as we plan this journey. There can't be any empirical research done at the moment because the curriculum isn't being delivered, but I understand, and we need listen to. If there are concerns out there in the field that these are unintended consequences that we may fall intothat is the value of that piece of research that helps inform us. I have to say, though, the curriculum in itself is neither going to necessarily on its own hugely enhance equity nor detract from equity, in the sense that the curriculum is what's taught in our schools. There is an opportunity, I believe, that empowering teachers to be able to be more flexible in what they teach their children actually gives us an opportunity to deliver lessons that could be much more engaging and much more relevant to some of our schoolchildren than what they have at the moment. What will make the curriculum a success for all of our children, and I believe will have a bigger impact on children who are in danger of being left behind, are the four enabling purposes of the curriculum. So, the curriculum on its own can play a part, but it will only be as good as the four enabling elements that surround it. And that is strong leadership of our schools that ensures that there is no segregation, that has high expectation of all of our children, and delivers a curriculum within that setting that meets the needs of the children there. In the end, no education system, whatever its curriculum, can exceed the quality of the people who stand in front of our children day in, day out. So, the curriculum can be the most exciting, wonderfuland I think it is exciting and I think it's wonderfulit can be the most exciting, wonderful thing in the world, but if teachers can't teach it effectively, if their pedagogy is not excellent, then the content itselfit won't work. So, how do you assess how children are doing in your new curriculum? How do you understand how that pupil, who has, you knowwho could be vulnerable for a whole host of reasons, usually reasons outside of the school? That pupil is vulnerable. How can you assess how that pupil is and move their learning along in an appropriate fashion? And then, finally, the well-being of the child. But what we know is that we cannot expect children to learn unless we address issues around their well-being. There's been lots and lots of research done, not in a Welsh context but in other systems, where children are kept behind for a year. So, good achievement leads to good well-being, but good well-being also leads to good achievement, and you can't separate the two. It is the four enabling objectives that sit around it, and we have to be cognisant of the WISERD's research, of course we do, to ensure that, as we're doing our professional learning, as we're planning well-being for our children, as we think about assessment methods and how we develop a culture of strong leaders in our schoolsand we have some, we have many, but we need to do more to support themit is that that will make the biggest difference, not just the content of the curriculum on its own. Although I do believe the flexibility that we're allowing people will, I think, lead to a curriculum and more meaningful lessons for some children in schools who are in danger of disengaging because they don't understand why they're being asked to learn what they're learning, they don't see the relevance of what they're learning to what they may want to do or how their lives are, or they don't see themselves reflected. So, for some of our communities, they don't see themselves reflected in the curriculum that we're teaching at the moment. And, again, international research would suggest that, if you want a child to thrive, they have to see themselves and their community reflected in what they're learning in schools. hefin david am: What the WISERD research suggests is that the senior management teamsthe management teamswould certainly buy into what you've just said, but the classroom teachers would be a little bit more sceptical. kirsty williams am: As I said, classroom teachers are absolutely crucial to this, which is why, first of all, we've taken the difficult step to delay the implementation of the curriculum to give us the time that we need to make sure that it's not just school leaders but it is individual classroom practitioners who have the skills that they need to make the most of the opportunity that the curriculum allows them. hefin david am: So, if we look at some of the statements that were in the presentation by WISERD at the seminar two comments jump out: 'We'll end up'this is from classroom teachers 'We'll end up with a different accountability framework to the aims and objectives of the new curriculum.' and 'there will be no consistency'. And consistency is the one I'd particularly like to focus on: 'there will be no consistency across all schools in how the new curriculum is delivered which could affect outcomes'. kirsty williams am: Well, first of all, we've just talked, haven't we, about trying to ensure that there is greater consistency and that's why we're changing our approach to the legislation around the Bill. So, in terms of progression steps, there will be a statutory framework to ensure that progression is the same wherever you are in Wales. So, as I said, we're using this report, we're using this feedback, to inform decisions going forward. hefin david am: Yes: 'different accountability framework to the aims and objectives of the new curriculum.' kirsty williams am: Okay. So, as always, in education, teachersunderstandably, because this is the regime that they have been a part ofimmediately don't think about their pedagogy, they think about, 'How are judgments going to be made upon me as an individual?' And what we're trying to do is ensure that we are developing another accountability regime that is indeed in line with the purposes of the curriculum and doesn't work against the purposes of the curriculum. They spend a lot of time thinking about accountability and how they're going to be held accountable for their practice, but, again, what we want to do is provide reassurance that we are devising an accountability regime for our system that is in line with the purposes of the curriculum and puts us in line with the mainstream thought and reform process across the world of progressive education systems. hefin david am: It was the segregation bit I was particularly interested in and the response with regard to disadvantaged pupils and pupils of lower attainment. I do not believe that any changesand I would not pursue any changes thatwould lead to a segregation. And with regard to the connection between Welsh Government and local government and the concerns that the Welsh Local Government Association and the Association of Directors of Education Wales raised, what progresshas been made on bridging the gap between? Whether it's a perception gap or a practice gap, what progress has been made on that? kirsty williams am: Well, I think the last time we had this conversation in the committee I said that I think the comments that the WLGA and ADEW had made were reflective of an old piece of work and were not current and up to date, and I think progress had been made in that time, and I'm pleased to report the significant progress that's been made hefin david am: Bridges have been built. But we've got renewed, energetic engagement from the WLGA and ADEW in all the arrangements that we have for the development of the curriculum and my understanding is that they have said publicly and in writing that they're very supportive of what's going on. hefin david am: I'm sure they're watching and nodding vigorously now on Senedd.tv. kirsty williams am: And I will be with them tomorrow night and Friday morning and I'm sure if they've got any other views they'll let me know. hefin david am: And the final question: there is a process, a model for this, which is Scotland. What kind of lessons are being learned from the introduction of their curriculum? kirsty williams am: Okay. So, I think the first thing to realise is that our curriculum is not a copycat of the Scottish curriculum, but it is always useful to reflect on how other systems have undertaken curriculum reform in their nation and to learn from any issues that have arisen. So, I think it's fair to sayand I spent time with some delegates from Scotland just this weekend at the Atlantic Rim Collaboratory conference that Wales hosted this year. Unfortunately, Minister Swinney was not able to attend at the very last minute because of Brexit preparedness work that he was involved in, but certainly their teaching union and their equivalent of the EWC in Scotland joined us as well as representatives from the Scottish Government, although not John himself, and they were very frank about some of the challenges that they had faced in introducing their curriculum. Professional learning, ensuring that the profession was properly prepared for the changes, I think they would agree that that wasn't necessarily. Well, they've got local authorities and regions, but whether they were truly engaged in what they were doing. Although our curriculum isn't a copycat, as I said, we have been able to learn from, and we've had people who have been deeply involved in the Scottish experience as part of some of our curriculum and assessment groups and some of the advice that we've had in terms of developing coherence. steve davies: As I said, they're very forthright in sharing their learning and I think one of the critical elements was the extent to which assessment was considered at the outset alongside the curriculum content. So, that was critical, but we've embraced experts who were involved in that process who were part of our curriculum assessment group. So, they feed in throughoutnot 'don't do this because Scotland has done it', but they feed some of that learning into the system. As the Minister said, we had seven other countries from across the world giving us feedback and input over four days as to where we can continue to look at what we're doing but also checks and balances against some of their experiences with this area of reform. kirsty williams am: The particular focus of this year's conference was on the issue of assessment and we were joined by colleagues from Scotland, from Ireland, from Iceland, from Finland, from Saskatchewan, from Nova Scotia and from Uruguay. hefin david am: When did that take place? kirsty williams am: Where? hefin david am: When. You've got a whole section on assessment, I don't know suzy davies am: This isn't about assessment. suzy davies am: So, on the basis that this is not about assessment, you mentioned that one of the lessons learned from Scotland is that they said they spent too much time on curriculum content rather than assessment. Can you tell me a little bit about what you've learned about how they quality control the content, even though the content, of course, will be completely different in Wales? kirsty williams am: Yes, the content would be completely different. When I said they spent too much time, I said that the focus had been in their work about just talking about content and, actually, the assessment arrangements were bolted on at the end of the process. So, the curriculum was all designed and developed, it was sent out to schools, and then the question was raised: 'Oh, actually, what assessment methods? How are going to assess how children are getting on?' But, Steve, you would have more details of their exact experience of quality control of the content suzy davies am: Of the content, because every school is going to be very different at this. steve davies: In terms of developing the guidance and the curriculum going out in January is concerned, I thinkagain, I don't want to be overly critical, but one of the findings was that they encouraged schools to go forth and multiply in terms of the materials and ideas and concepts that were coming through. What we learnt was to actuallythe pioneer movement was to get a smaller group to develop those materials and look to engage through cluster groups. So, we had pioneers who worked with clusters to test the development of that concept before we were looking for schools to go away and develop a larger amount of content. So, in terms of the staging and measuring of bringing together the curriculum and the associated guidance, I think the time we've taken to actually get there and the strategy of using pioneer schools, external experts, back to pioneer schools, back to regions, or engaging regions in that, has been more measured and planned against a planned timescale, where everyone from the outsetwith the exception of the extension of the one yearwas clear on when we were going to be producing materials that would allow the profession to then take it and use it. Claire, do you want to add to that, or? claire bennett: I think, as we move forward, that kind of cluster approach remains really important. So, it's, as schools then think about, 'What am I going to do in my school?', that they're doing that in clusters together. When colleagues from the regional consortia were sharing their thinking with the curriculum assessment group last week, they were talking about the very specific and differentiated, I suppose, professional learning support that they would be offering to schools that have already done quite a lot of thinking and are quite far down this journey and then the kind of different sorts of approaches they would offer schools that are just starting out. Their emphasis was very much on this peer-to-peer sharing and support, so people aren't just going off in isolation. So, there'll continue to be a focus for each area of learning and experience, bringing together the professional learning and the ongoing curriculum development, bringing together practitioners and experts and colleagues across the middle tier to give a bit of strategic direction and to be able to identify if there are areas where more support is needed. So, I think that a huge amount of thinking, particularly in the regions, has gone on into the practical support that can be given to schools, not just in engaging with the curriculum now, but then how they take it and think about then developing it in their schools. You don't start in 2022people are already doing it and there's a lot of thought going into how to support continued sharing through the next two years. kirsty williams am: And I think that's another difference, you seethat strong middle tier and the role that the middle tier is playing in Wales, which was absent in Scotland. So, this ability to work in networks to provide support to a network of schools, that wasn't available in the Scottish system and I think that makesI think that helps us in the way that they just simply didn't have a structure that allowed them to do that. It's not a criticism of them; it's just that we have got a structure that we can utilise to do that support so that schools are not completely left on their own and they can be working with other schools, with their regional consortia, going forward. suzy davies am: Can I just have a quick? lynne neagle am: Very quickly, because I want to move on to implementation. Was one of the things that Scotland didI don't want to use the word 'assess'to monitor the pupil response to the curriculum as one of the means of deciding whether curricula in particular schools were working well enough? kirsty williams am: I don't know if they. I don't know if they did, but one of the interesting things that we were reflecting on over the weekend is that, certainly some of the Canadian systems, in particular, which we were interested in, used pupil surveys as part of their accountability regimeso, actually taking the time to ask students how they felt, not just about the content of the new curriculum, but actually how they felt their school was doing. And so we're interested in looking, as I said, at some of the practices that other countries use to include pupil voice to find out what's happening. They found that particular useful and successful, and we're keen to see if we could do something similar. You touched on this briefly in response to some questions from Hefin David earlier on, but I'm just interested to know how the money that you announced for supporting teachers for the preparation of the implementation, how that's actually been used. What specifically have teachers been doing to prepare for its implementation? I know you've set aside about 24 million over two years. kirsty williams am: You're right, first of all, it's not an insignificant amount; it's the largest investment in professional learning since the history of devolution. So, you're right that it is not insignificant, and it was a hard-won resource, I can tell you, from my colleagues. Because, as I said earlier, the curriculum itself can be amazing, but if our teachers and our professionals are not equipped to deliver it, then all this change will be for nothing. That money is being made available to each and every school and has empowered headteachers to really think, 'What are the professional needs of my school and the practitioners in my school?' Because, as we've just heard from Claire, there are some schools that have been part of the pioneer process from the very beginning and therefore are further along that development chain. There are other schools that maybe are only beginning now, now that it's published, to be really engaging with the curriculum. kirsty williams am: There is a national element to it, but we've given the money to individual schools and individual headteachers because I have no way of knowing how each individual practitioner is ready or how much additional support they're going to need. But we have worked with the National Academy for Educational Leadership to put together a programme for headteachers, and that's national. The regional consortia are working together to provide consistency for classroom teachers and teaching assistants, and then the next stage of that development is for subject specifics. Claire referred to the AoLE networks, and there's an opportunity then for people to engage in that. So, this September is the start of our new ITE courses, taught for the first time, and that's great. So, we're looking at developing potentially a stronger set of support, again on a national basis, for those who are newly qualified, beginning their teaching career, because I don't think we've done that on a consistently good level across the country. We're also working with the regions to revisit and improve their coaching and mentoring schemes that they have across the system. We're also involved inand I'm sure the committee has heard about it, so forgive me if I'm going over old groundschools as learning organisations and the OECD work to support schools to develop that culture as a learning organisation. We know from very successful education systems in other parts of the world there is a strong, strong culture of self-evaluation as a first step in their school improvement system, and we've not been very good at that in Wales, we've not been strong at that, that's not the culture that we have had. We've kind of depended on a culture where a school does its thing and then somebody comes along and tells you whether you're good or bad, rather than the school really thinking itself deeply about, 'What are we doing well and what do we need to improve on?' So, the schools as learning organisations are an important part, again, so that money is being used for schools participating in that programme with support from the OECD. And the money that you announced for thisprofessional development preparation, if you like, was for two years. So, there's going to clearly be an ongoing programme of preparation development and personal development, as well as anything else. But is there likely to be any more money allocated specifically beyond the two years that you've already allocated or is that going to be a question and negotiation with your colleagues? Or do you see what you've put in as being, 'This is what we need to develop or to prepare for the implementation. The rest would be what would be normal professional development beyond that'? kirsty williams am: The money that was agreed was for a two-year period and, clearly, I continue to have conversations with the Minister for Finance and the First Minister around future allocations for professional learning, and I'm sure this committee and, indeed, members of this committee could help me in that task. Can you tell us a bit about the innovation schoolsthe 16 innovation schoolsand how you've made your decisions about who they might be, across which sectors, in primary, secondary and so on? So, basically, how they were selected and what you're expecting of them. So, all of our schools that had previously been pioneers were invited to apply to morph into the next phase, which is innovation schools, and they were asked to apply and there was a discussion held both internally within Welsh Government and with the consortia about which schools were best placed to be able to do that role and to continue to work with us, going forward. I think one of the lessons learned, and this was said in the committee, was that there was an upside to having pioneer schools, but there was a downside to having pioneer schools, and I think, at this stage of the game, we need to move away from that model and to really get the message to everybody that they all had to be pioneers noweverybody had to be a pioneerbecause this is coming down the track and we don't want anybody just sitting there waiting until September 2022 and saying, 'Oh, gosh. So, the move away is partly to engender within the sector the fact that we've all got to engage in this now. The innovation schools have led to a very specific piece of work as we do the final refinement, and their main role is working with us on these final refinements to the content but also to the assessment issues and accountability issues. It was important that we engaged with the regions to get their view, and we've had evaluation being carried out claire bennett: Yes. So, during the first term of work, we asked them to really look at the curriculum as a wholeso, take the whole curriculum guidance and then think, 'How would I apply that in the school?, Does it make sense?, Can we work with it?, What are the issues?, What are the questions that arise for us for assessment?', and each of the schools produced a report setting out their reflections on, 'If I were putting this into practice'. So, it's slightly different to the feedback we've had from other people, which has been more, 'Maybe you should emphasise this or change that wording' and kind of quite practical, and really about how you would realise this curriculum in a school. That's been drawn together into an overall report, drawing out the themes, by Wavehill, who are a kind of research company. Having 16 headteachers in a room talking about how they see this curriculum and the way in which they would practically engage with it has been invaluable, in just making us think, even with all the practitioners that have been involved, 'How do we make this work for schools?', given that we've got schools and headteachers really engaging in the detail of how they would use it practically. So, it's been invaluable, and they're continuing on that work now this term to keep making sure that what we're doing is something that schools can actually realise practically. kirsty williams am: If you think of the pioneer model, pioneers were looking at specific aspects of the curriculum. So, you might have been a pioneer school because you had particular strengths in health and well-being, or you might have been a pioneer schools because you were particularly looking at professional learning needs to support the curriculum. This is about, at this stage, where we have a high degree of certainty about what it's going to look like, 'Actually, how do I as a school practically implement this in the round?', and the schools were chosen because of their ability to do that. But also we did need a mix of sectorsecondary, primarybut also linguistically, to just try to make sure that this works in all the different types of schools we've got. So, just trying the practical implementation now, now that we know exactlynot exactly but we have a good idea what it's actually going to look like, so, 'How am I going to go about doing this?' lynne neagle am: Okay. If I could ask as well, maybe you could provide the committee with a list of the new innovation schools. sian gwenllian am: Are you confident that every school across Wales is participating in this process of change now, because the danger is, in getting these pioneer schools? I understand that they are discussing in clusters, and so on, but can you put your hand on your heart and say that every school is participating in this project now? steve davies: I can't tell you that, absolutely, 100 per cent are definitely, totally, absolutely equally involved. The structure we've got in place across the regions is working with schools on their readiness to actuallynot readiness to engagestart to deliver as we move through to the future. And we don't have a roll-call against all schools, but we require them, or request of them that they keep us informed of the networks. Every school is part of a network that links to it, and they gauge (1) the level of activity in it, (2) the outcomes of that work, because each of the networks, each of the clusters, produces work that the region brings together. What I would say, and it touches on the point you raised earlier and in relation to Scotland, I think if we had 22 units of local authorities trying to do this, it would be incredibly complex and very difficult to deliver. dawn bowden am: I just wanted to clarify, because in your paper you talk about giving 30,000 to each, or to the innovation schools. Was that 30,000 each, or 30,000 for the project? kirsty williams am: Each school that participates in the innovation schools programme gets 30,000. My final question in this section is just about how we are going to deal with the issue of teachers who are not trained in Wales. So, teachers trained in England apply for jobs in Wales, but they obviously haven't been trained in the new curriculum. Well, you're rightwe will continue to have a system where teachers trained in Wales will teach in England and teachers trained in England or who have worked in England will come across the border, as well as teachers from other parts of the world coming to teach in our schools. Indeed, when I'm feeling at my most confident and bullish about these issues, I think Wales will be a really attractive place to be a teacher because of the autonomy that we will be giving to our professionals, as well as an exciting new curriculum. So, I think, actually, potentially, we will have people coming across the border to teach here because it'll be a great place to be a professional. So, our programmes of study are already different and that does not preclude anybody from coming across to teach in our system from a different system. Clearly, there may be pedagogical concepts in the new curriculum that perhaps somebody who had trained in a different system would not be completely au fait with, but that is the ongoing role of professional learning within our school system, because we've just talked about the two years' worth of money; in an ideal world, if I was able to make long-term plans, I think there will be an ongoing, and there should always be an ongoing, provision for professional learning in our classrooms. And this shouldn't just be about just getting people ready for the curriculum and then taking away professional learning budgets. One of the ways in which I think we can attract teachers to Wales is to send a very clear message and actually attract people into the profession and keep them in the profession, wherever they trainthat you will have a career in teaching where you will be continually supported in your practice via professional learning. dawn bowden am: So, you'll still be recruiting on the basis of skills and adaptability and so on. We've got a lot of issues to cover, so I'm going to appeal for concise questions, concise answers. What was the feedback like with regard to the draft assessment proposals? lynne neagle am: Excellent, concise question. We received what I would describe as positive feedback regarding the emphasis placed on ongoing assessment that is there to support children's learning and progression. Key messages were perhaps to find a better way of expressing the purposes of assessmentwe refer to a formative and summative assessmentand just being a bit clearer about what that actually means and being clear about definitions around it. suzy davies am: Obviously, we're all aware now of the distinction between assessment of pupils for their own progression and the evaluation of how a school does at certain points in its life cycle as well. Presumably, the way you're looking at this is to keep these items completely separate, and that evaluation and assessment proposals will be. They're out in a separate document; their results are going to be coming forward in a separate documentis that right? There's a thick black line between these two concepts. I think some of the trouble that we've got ourselves in previously is because there has not been a clear distinction between assessment and accountability, and, when you start using assessment for accountability purposes, that's when, potentially, that assessment process gets corrupted and you have gaming. suzy davies am: Can I ask, with the assessments, though, which is about pupil progression, will those results be published internally? Will parents get to see those? kirsty williams am: Oh, yes. The primary purpose for assessment is for that professional to be able to know how to move that child's educational journey on, and you would absolutely expect professionals to have those conversations with parents, whether they're using formative methods of assessment or summative methods of assessment. So, absolutely, you would expect teachers to be sharing information around assessment methods, whichever type they use, with parents, to describe and to inform parents about what happens next for their child. Is it realistic, then, to expect parents, families, communities, not to think about that information when they're drawing conclusions about the school, notwithstanding that formal evaluation of those schools is going to be done completely separately? kirsty williams am: Well, of course, parents will always be interested in how the overall institution is doing. But the conversations I have with parents, and I certainly feel this myself as a parentI'm interested in how my child is doing, how my child is getting on in school, what are the issues that that child has, and, more importantly, what is the school going to do about it? So, if my child is struggling for whatever reason, what is the school going to do about that to help that child? If my child happens to be exceptionally able and talented, how are you as a school going to make the most of my child's talents and move them on to fulfil their potential? So, undoubtedly, I can't control assumptions that parents will make, but it is absolutely clear in this system, and my intention is, that teachers should share assessment methods and outcomes with parents to have that conversation about what happens next. But I am absolutely clear that we do have to make this distinction between assessment for learning and an accountability in the system, otherwise we driveinadvertently; people don't set out to do it, but we drive a set of behaviours that has negative unintended outcomes. So, how? Can you just briefly give us an indication of how you think the accountability, on both sides of that thick black linethe methodologyis likely to change with this? You mentioned that there's going to be an independent review of performance measurements coming shortly; we know that some of the existing ones have been ditched in fairly recent legislation. Without pre-empting the findings of such a review, have you got your top three likely expected changes? kirsty williams am: To accountability? suzy davies am: Yes. Well, we're moving to a system of schools as learning organisations, and a greater emphasis on self-evaluation, with external verification of that by Estyn, our inspectors. suzy davies am: And that will be reflected in the school categorisation system as wellwill those indicators change, do you think? kirsty williams am: Well, categorisationagain, the purpose for categorisation is not to make a judgment on a school in the sense of a league table; it's a triage process, categorisation. kirsty williams am: Well, this is the issue, isn't it? This is the problem of designing a system where there are perfectly good reasons to introduce the systemand in this case it's a triage system to identify levels of support for a school. And categorisation was never intended to be a way of expressing a league table of school performances; it's there to identify levels of support that a school can expect from its regional consortia. Now, we have, we havewe will continue to keep categorisation, but, since coming into office, we have tried to adapt categorisation simply away from pure data to a more formative assessment process, and categorisation will continue to evolve. And the first level of accountability in that system has to be the professionalism of an individual member of staffthe moral purpose that I bring to my classroom today to do right by the children that are in front of me. That's the first part of our accountability regimethe moral purpose our professionals bring to their work. Well, just finally on that, there may be an argument, then, for scrapping categorisation, putting something else in place. But I suppose the core question is: how are the general public going to understand all those things that you've just mentioned about the teachers being able to teach, the leaders being able to lead, and how well a school is performing against KPIs on those measures? kirsty williams am: Well, because we will still. kirsty williams am: Yes, that's the ultimate, isn't it? So, the ultimate is. The ultimate system that we're going to get to and the ultimate arbiter and the part of the system that provides public assurance and public confidence ultimately ends in Estyn. Because I get the point of the end point being Estyn, and that's where the public assurance will be seen, but what about the public assurance at those early steps of the teaching standards and the leadership standards? Where will we see those demonstrated? kirsty williams am: Well, you would expect to see those demonstrated in the self-evaluation that a school will provide of itself, and then Estyn suzy davies am: All right, so schools will be publishing self-evaluations annually, or something like that? kirsty williams am: Yes, schools steve davies: The outcome of the self-evaluation is a school development plan. steve davies: We expect a series of priorities for a school to set itself as a result of prioritisation. What we're looking at, in terms of what's brought to that, is not a narrow set of measuresjust two measures, or one measure in a secondary school. The measures will still consider reflection on progress of children, but it'll also have reviews of mental health, well-being, how it approaches that and things that it wanted to do. The school is evaluatingthe outcome of that will be a development plan, annually published on the website. kirsty williams am: And the schools' abilitywhether they do that well or whether they don't do it wellwill be judged by Estyn. lynne neagle am: Okay, as my colleague Chair Dai Lloyd would say, 'Now we're into the needing serious agility territory'. Firstly from me: Qualifications Wales have told us that the curriculum must define qualifications rather than the other way around. What implications does that have for the amount of time that is needed to develop qualifications that are properly aligned with the new curriculum? kirsty williams am: Well, I'd absolutely agree with Qualifications Wales. The qualifications have to arise out of the curriculum, and the qualifications should not be dictating the curriculum. Qualifications Wales, which I met with yesterday, I thinkyes, yesterday; it seems a long time agowill begin their national conversation about reform of qualifications as a result of curriculum reform in November. How is awareness and understanding of human rights, including childrens rights, being embedded in the new curriculum? kirsty williams am: Children's rights, human rightsthey've been key considerations throughout the design, and this is currently set out in overarching guidance and we continue to work with the children's commissioner's office to map the rights of the child across each area of learning and experience. And I'm delighted that the children's commissioner took the time to write to me during the feedback phase to say that they were very pleased that their initial assessment demonstrates that what we're proposing is a big step forward. And how do you respond to the concerns expressed in the children's commissioners quarterly report of July 2019 that consultation materials for young people were not released until mid June, allowing just over a month for young people to engage? And they said it was disappointing that a plan was not in place at the start of the consultation period. kirsty williams am: Well, we undertook a specific programme of engagement with children and young people, as I said at the beginning. We had over 20 events where focus groups of young children were involved and we had a number of children who took the opportunity to feed back via different mechanisms. The output of that engagement and feedback has been drawn together into a report exploring learners' views about schools and learning. It's a powerful contribution and I think will actually effect change, especially in how the 'what matters' statements are worded. sian gwenllian am: Turning to the Welsh dimension in the new curriculum, the Learned Society of Wales has said that there needs to be a directory of resources to implement that Welsh dimension. Do you agree with that and will you be publishing such a resource? kirsty williams am: We have a separate programme of work that is looking at resources that are needed to support the curriculum. It's one of the conversations I had with Qualifications Wales yesterday to try to avoid the debacle that we've had previously, where we have new qualifications and the resources to support those qualifications aren't available. So, we're already having those conversations with Qualifications Wales and there is a piece of work that is ongoing to look at what are the resources that are necessary to support the curriculum. And, in terms of the single continuum of learning with regard to the Welsh language, how are progression steps and achievement outcomes in Welsh-medium schools going to work and how are they going to work in English-medium schools? kirsty williams am: Okay. Just on the Welsh dimension, I think it's really important that whatever resources we have to support the Welsh dimension are really, really, really broad and not confined to specific areas. I was in Swansea University just this week, looking at some of their Technocamp work that they're doing to help us with coding, and we had an amazing conversation about the Welsh contribution to the computing industry. And so my expectation is that that isn't taught in a history lessonthat, actually, when children are learning about coding, they get to hear that Welsh people have been at the forefront of developing this technology. When I talk about a Welsh dimension,  right the way across the curriculum, and I think that's important. The continuum for language will have to be contextualised depending on the setting where a child is being taught. We have to recognise that, and there will be progression points on that continuum that will be there to show progression both in Welsh language and in the English language, and they have to be contextualised. We recognise that children learning Welsh in a Welsh-medium school, their progressional on that point would be more speedy and quicker, and by the end of primary school they would be in a very different position than a child that was learning Welsh in an English-medium school. Vice versawe've had this discussion beforeif a child is going into Welsh medium, their progression in English perhaps from age three to seven would be very different from a child that was in an English-medium school, although the expectation would be that by 11 they would be in the same position. So, we have to contextualise that learning continuum depending on the medium of tuition with the school, but recognising that it is a progression. sian gwenllian am: With regard to the creative thinking element of PISA, I take it that you are adhering to the fact that the Welsh Government is opting out of the creative thinking tests with regard to PISA 2020. I don't entirely understand that because the new curriculum does place great emphasis on creative thinking and independent thinking. So, why not participate in these tests? kirsty williams am: Because, for me, the key factor for making that decision, and I intend to stick to it, is in 2021 we will be expecting schools to be right in the middle of their preparation for the introduction of the new curriculum sian gwenllian am: Okay, so it's the timing. sian gwenllian am: So, later on, maybe when this is embedded kirsty williams am: I think there could well be a different decision at a later date, but at 2021 this is not the right time to do it. Can I just say? In terms of creativity, Wales is seen as an exemplar by the OECD, especially our partnership with the Arts Council of Wales and creative learning through the arts. That's why I don't understand why we're not actually going for it and showing how good we are through the PISA. kirsty williams am: There could well be a different decision, but for 2021 we're asking enough of people at the moment and this would be an unnecessary addition to cope with. I just don't think that that should be seen as us running away from it because we're worried about a lack of creativity in our education system. We are seen as exemplars by the OECDand some of the work that's been going on with creative learning through the schools is now being shared internationally. sian gwenllian am: So, you'll think about it for the next round of PISA. kirsty williams am: Oh gosh, that shows that Sin thinks that I'll be here to make that decision. Countries were offered if they wished to take the invite to come into it, and a number of countries across the world are yet to make their decision on this. janet finch-saunders am: Can you give a guarantee that all children and young people, where appropriate, will take part in physical activity under the new curriculum for Wales? Also, how much time per week will the Government expect children and young people to spend undertaking physical activity? kirsty williams am: Yes, all children will be given that opportunity, because if they are not then that school would be in breach of the expectations that will be set out in statute. janet finch-saunders am: How will you monitor it? kirsty williams am: Again, Janet, I don't go around monitoring schools now. As we've just said janet finch-saunders am: How will you ensure that every child has that opportunity? kirsty williams am: Well, as we've just said, ultimately, we are not getting rid of our school improvement services and regional consortia, nor are we getting rid of Estyn. So, one would expect the quality of the curriculum to be a key consideration of any visit that Estyn would make to a school. To what extent will the new curriculum allow for the continuity of the way that the foundation phase is taught? Will there be any significant differences and have the early years professionals been involved in the development of the curriculum to date? kirsty williams am: Yes, early years professionals have been involved in the curriculum to date. One of the advantages, I think, of the new curriculum is to take the pedagogical principles that underpin our approach to early years education actually further into children's educational journey. We have a certain pedagogical approach until the age of seven, and then all of a sudden, at seven, it's like, 'Forget all of that now. Sit down, pick up your pen and do this.' That's been really uncomfortable for many practitioners in our primary sector. So, actually, yes, statutory and non-statutory provision have been involved in the development of the curriculum because, of course, some of this is going to be delivered in the non-statutory sector. I'm very welcoming and supportive of that, but those pedagogical principles will now be available throughout that child's educational journey, rather than the false divide we've got at the moment. suzy davies am: So, aside from the purposes and the AoLEs, the type of teaching is unlikely to change in the foundation phase settings. The other end of the scale now: you report that one of the themes of the feedback from further education has been the need to ensure that the transition to post-16 education is supported so that the systems don't just clash against each other. How are you working on the sector at the moment to make sure that there's a decent dovetail? kirsty williams am: Okay. We don't want to do anything in pre-16 that stops people going on to be successful in post-16, whichever route the child or young person decides to take. FE have been involved in every single AoLE and they're a part of the curriculum and assessment group. And then in the conversations we had yesterday with Qualifications Wales around what qualifications will look like, I was very keen to take the opportunity to emphasise that any changes to qualifications should be a gateway to further study in FE, whichever type of route the child took. suzy davies am: And you're confident they're geared up to accepting young people who have been educated in this way. sian gwenllian am: I think you actually answered this at the beginning, but just to confirm that you're carrying on with the same governance set-up, the different groups that you've got, and there's nothing being added there or taken away. And just finally from me, then, on pupil referral units: what arrangements will be in place to ensure that they can benefit from the new curriculum and how is that going to be reflected in the legislation? kirsty williams am: Okay. So, we've been taking advice from Brett Pugh, who chairs the education otherwise than at school improvement group, and this has been an area where we've had to think really, really, really, really, really hard. So, what we intend to do for EOTAS and PRU is to set a minimum of what we would expect a child to receive. So, that would be around the four purposes; that would be around the cross-cutting themes of literacy, numeracy and digital competency and health and well-being. After that, then there needs to be a discussion and a focus on what is in the best interests of that particular pupil. One of the things we know about sometimes in EOTAS is we have very able and talented students who don't get access to the range of qualifications and courses that they have the capability and the aptitude to do. We also have to consider, though, that for some children they may be out of school for reasons, and telling them that they've got to do a full curriculum may be hugely detrimental to their mental health and well-being. So, for instance, to give an example, you could have a child who's very ill, and saying to them, 'You have to carry the full load of a curriculum' could be inappropriate. So, we'll be setting a minimum standard, as I said, around the purposes, around the cross-cutting themes and health and well-being, and then there will be an expectation that in conjunction with the child and the family an appropriate addition would be put in place to meet the needs of that child, recognising that they could have very different needs. Is that clear? lynne neagle am: Well, yes, and it's something that we'll probably look to build on when we look at our inquiry on EOTAS, which is coming up. So, can I thank you for attending and thank your officials for coming today? As usual, we will send you a transcript to check for accuracy following the meeting, but thank you again, all of you, for your attendance this morning. As Members will see, there are a substantial number of papers to note23 in total, which are in a supplementary pack. As there are so many, can I suggest that we note them all together and then we've got an opportunity to return to some of them in the private session afterwards? Is that okay with everybody? Okay. Can I propose in accordance with Standing Order 17.42 that the committee resolves to meet in private for the remainder of the meeting? Are Members content?
phd c: Adam , what is the mike that , Jeremy 's wearing ?  grad f: It 's the ear - plug mike . professor b: Oh ! postdoc a: Is that Does that mean you can't hear anything during the meeting ? grad d: It 's old - school . grad f: Huh ? What ? Huh ? professor b: Should we , close the door , maybe ? grad f: It it 's a fairly good mike , actually . professor b: Well , that 's a grad f: Ugh ! So I didn't send out agenda items because until five minutes ago we only had one agenda item and now we have two . So , just to repeat the thing bef that we said last week , it was there 's this suggestion of alternating weeks on more , automatic speech recognition related or not ? Was that sort of the division ? grad f: Right . professor b: So which week are we in ? grad f: Well We haven't really started , but I thought we more we more or less did Meeting Recorder stuff last week , so I thought we could do ,  professor b: I thought we had a thing about speech recognition last week too . grad f: But I figure also if they 're short agenda items , we could also do a little bit of each . grad f: So , as most of you should know , I did send out the consent form thingies and , so far no one has made any Ach ! any comments on them . So , w what follows ? At some point y you go around and get people to sign something ? grad f: No . professor b: And how long of an opportunity did you tell them ? grad f: July fifteenth . professor b: Given that it 's that long ,  Why was that date chosen ? You just felt you wanted to ? grad f: Jane told me July fifteenth . postdoc a: I ,  I thought grad f: You y you had professor b: I don't grad f: I had heard July fifteenth , so that 's what I put . professor b: No , the only th the only mention I recall about that was just that July fifteenth or so is when this meeting starts . postdoc a: It 's fine with me if it is , or we cou But I thought it might be good to remind people two weeks prior to that professor b: w postdoc a: in case ,  you know , " by the way this is your last " professor b: Right . professor b: We probably should have talked about it , cuz i because if we wanna be able to give it to people July fifteenth , if somebody 's gonna come back and say " OK , I don't want this and this and this used " , clearly we need some time to respond to that .  the people who are in the meeti this meeting was , these the meetings that in are in set one . grad f: I we don't My understanding of what we had agreed upon when we had spoken about this months ago was that , we don't actually need a reply . postdoc a: And he 's got it so that the default thing you see when you look at the page is " OK " . postdoc a: So that 's very clear all the way down the page , " OK " . postdoc a: Which means also we get feedback on if  , there 's something that they w that needs to be adjusted , because , these are very highly technical things .  , it 's an added , level of checking on the accuracy of the transcription , as I see it . The reason I did that it was just so that people would not censor not ask to have stuff removed because it was transcribed incorrectly , postdoc a: And the reason I liked it was because grad f: as opposed to ,  postdoc a: was because it ,  it gives them the option of , being able to correct it . So , you have it nicely set up so they email you and ,  grad f: When they submit the form , it gets processed and emailed to me . phd c: Oh , those are the NSA meetings ? phd e: The non - native phd h: Those are postdoc a: Yeah . phd e: The all non - native postdoc a: That 's that 's that 's r grad f:   postdoc a: But what what I meant to say was that it 's the other group that 's not n no m no overlap with our present members . And then maybe it 'd be good to set an explicit deadline , something like a week before that , J July fifteenth date , or two weeks before . professor b: I would suggest we discuss  , if we 're going to have a policy on it , that we discuss the length of time that we want to give people , grad f:   grad f: Well , the only thing I said in the email is that the data is going to be released on the fifteenth . grad f: So my feeling is if someone after the fifteenth says , " wow I suddenly found something " , we 'll delete it from our record . grad f: If someone says " hey , look , I found something in this meeting and it 's libelous and I want it removed " . postdoc a: I I agree with that part , but I think that it would it ,  we need to have , a a a message to them very clearly that beyond this date , you can't make additional changes . professor b: So if we agreed , OK , how long is a reasonable amount of time for people to have if we say two weeks , or if we say a month , I think we should just say that say that , you know , i a as  , " per the the the , page you signed , you have the ability to look over this stuff " and so forth " and , because we w " these ,  I would I would imagine some sort of generic thing that would say " because we , will continually be making these things available to other researchers , this can't be open - ended and so , please give us back your response within this am you know , within this amount of time " , whatever time we agree upon . grad f: Well , did you read the email and look at the pages I sent ? professor b: Did I ? No , I haven't yet . OK , well why don't you do that and then make comments on what you want me to change ? professor b: No , no . I I 'm what I 'm what I 'm I 'm trying to spark a discussion hopefully among people who have read it so that that you can you can , decide on something . professor b: and then grad f: I already did decide something , and that 's what 's in the email . OK , so grad f: And if you disagree with it , why don't you read it and give me comments on it ? postdoc a: Yeah . professor b: Well , the one thing that I did read and that you just repeated to me was that you gave the specific date of July fifteenth . professor b: And you also just said that the reason you said that was because someone said it to you . So what I 'm telling you is that what you should do is come up with a length of time that you guys think is enough grad f: Right . But we can make the assumption , can't we ? that , they will be receiving email , most of the month . Sometimes somebody will be away and , you know , there 's ,  for any length of time that you  , choose there is some person sometime who will not end up reading it . phd h: S so maybe when Am I on , by the way ? grad f: I don't know . The ,  Maybe we should say in w you know , when the whole thing starts , when they sign the the agreement that you know , specify exactly  , what , you know , how how they will be contacted and they can , you know they can be asked to give a phone number and an email address , or both . A And , then , you know , say very clearly that if they don't if we don't hear from them , you know , as Morgan suggested , by a certain time or after a certain period after we contact them that is implicitly giving their agreement . postdoc a: the f phd h: Well , if that 's i tha if that 's already if grad f: so , eh , that 's gonna be a little hard to modify . postdoc a: Well , the form Well , the form doesn't say , if  , you know , " if you don't respond by X number of days or X number of weeks " phd h: I see . So what does it say about the the the process of of ,  y the review process ? postdoc a: It doesn't have a time limit . That you 'll be provided access to the transcripts and then , allowed to remove things that you 'd like to remove , before it goes to the general  , larger audience . phd e: I 'm not as diligent as Chuck , but I had the feeling I should probably respond and tell Adam , like , " I got this and I will do it by this date , and if you don't hear from me by then " You know , in other words responding to your email once , right away , saying " as soon as you get this could you please respond . phd e: And then if you if the person thinks they 'll need more time because they 're out of town or whatever , they can tell you at that point ? Because grad f: Oh , I just I didn't wanna do that , because I don't wanna have a discussion with every person if I can avoid it . phd e: Well , it 's grad f: So what I wanted to do was just send it out and say " on the fifteenth , the data is released , postdoc a:   grad f: if you wanna do something about it , do something about it , but that 's it " . So , we 're assuming that phd h: Well , that 's that would be great if but you should probably have a legal person look at this and make sure it 's OK . Because if you if you , do this and you then there 's a dispute later and , some you know , someone who understands these matters concludes that they didn't have , you know , enough opportunity to actually exercise their their right phd e: Or they they might never have gotten the email , because although they signed this , they don't know by which date to expect your email . grad f: So let 's say someone I send this out , and someone doesn't respond . Do we delete every meeting that they were in ? phd e: Well , then grad f: I don't think so . phd e: but that 's why there 's such a thing as registered mail grad f: That will happen . Because people don't read their email , or they 'll read and say " I don't care about that , I 'm not gonna delete anything " and they don just won't reply to it . phd h: Maybe  , do we have mailing addresses for these people ? grad f: No . postdoc a: But the ones that we 're dealing with now are all local , phd h: Well , then postdoc a: except the ones who  , we we 're totally in contact with all the ones in those two groups . postdoc a: So maybe , I you know , that 's not that many people and if I if ,  i i there is an advantage to having them admit and if I can help with with processing that , I will . It 's it 's there is an advantage to having them be on record as having received the mail and indicating grad f: Yeah . grad f: And so it seems like this is a little odd for it to be coming up yet again . professor b: Right ? So phd e: You 'll either wonder at the beginning or you 'll wonder at the end . phd e: there 's no way to get around I It 's pretty much the same am amount of work except for an additional email just saying they got the email . phd e: And maybe it 's better legally to wonder before you know , a little bit earlier than grad f: Well postdoc a: It 's much easier to explain this way . Well , why don't you talk t postdoc a: T t to have it on record . grad f: Morgan , can you talk to our lawyer about it , and find out what the status is on this ? Cuz I don't wanna do something that we don't need to . grad f: Because what I 'm telling you , people won't respond to the email . No matter what you do , you there 're gonna be people who you 're gonna have to make a lot of effort to get in contact with . grad d: i it 's k grad f: And do we want to spend that effort ? phd h:  . postdoc a: Except I really think in this case I I 'm agr I agree with Liz , that we need to be in the clear and not have to after the fact say " oh , but I assumed " , and " oh , I 'm sorry that your email address was just accumulating mail without notifying you " , you know . professor b: But the thing is that , you know , I I I think , without going through a whole expensive thing with our lawyers , from my previous conversations with them , my my sense very much is that we would want something on record as indicating that they actually were aware of this . grad f: and I thought that we had even gone by the lawyers asking about that and they said you have to s they 've already signed away the f with that form that they 've already signed once . postdoc a: I don't remember that this issue of the time period allowed for response was ever covered . professor b: We certainly didn't talk , about with them at all about , the manner of them being made the , materials available . phd h: We do it like with these professor b: That was something that was sort of just within our implementation . phd h: We can use it we can use a a ploy like they use to ,  you know , that when they serve , like  , you know , like dead - beat dads , they they they make it look like they won something in the lottery and then they open the envelope grad d: And they 're served . So you just make it , you know , " oh , you won you know , go to this web site and you 've ,  you 're " phd e: That 's why you never open these things that come in the mail . grad f: Well , it 's just , we 've gone from one extreme to the other , where at one point , a few months ago , Morgan was you were saying let 's not do anything , phd h: Right . phd h: i i it it might well be the case grad f: and now we 're we 're saying we have to follow up each person and get a signature ? phd h: it might Right . grad f: what are we gonna doing here ? phd h: It might well be the case that that this is perfectly you know , this is enough to give us a basis t to just , eh , assume their consent if they don't reply . phd h: But , I 'm not you know , me not being a lawyer , I wouldn't just wanna do that without having the the expert , opinion on that . grad f: Then I think we had better find out , so that we can find a phd h: Yeah . I I think that it 's a common courtesy to ask them  , to expect for them to , be able to have @ @ us try to contact them , grad f: For for th postdoc a: u just in case they hadn't gotten their email . My Adam , my my view before was about the nature of what was of the presentation , grad f:   professor b: of of how my my the things that we 're questioning were along the lines of how easy  , h how m how much implication would there be that it 's likely you 're going to be changing something , as opposed to grad f:   professor b: But , the attorneys , I  , I can guarantee you , the attorneys will always come back with and we have to decide how stringent we want to be in these things , but they will always come back with saying that , you need to you want to have someth some paper trail or which includes electronic trail that they have , in fact O K 'd it . professor b: So , I think that if you f i if we send the email as you have and if there 's half the people , say , who don't respond at all by , you know , some period of time , we can just make a list of these people and hand it to ,  you know , just give it to me and I 'll hand it to administrative staff or whatever , grad f: Right . professor b: and they 'll just call them up and say , you know , " have you Is is this OK ? And would you please mail you know , mail Adam that it is , if i if it , you know , is or not . phd e: The other thing that there 's a psychological effect that at least for most people , that if they 've responded to your email saying " yes , I will do it " or " yes , I got your email " , they 're more likely to actually do it later than to just ignore it . phd e: And of course we don't want them to bleep things out , but it it 's a little bit better if we 're getting the their , final response , once they 've answered you once than if they never answer you 'd at al at all . phd e: You know , an official OK from somebody is better than no answer , even if they responded that they got your email . And they 're probably more likely to do that once they 've responded that they got the email . professor b: I think the main thing is  , what lawyers do is they always look at worst cases . professor b: So they s so so Tha - that 's what they 're paid to do . professor b: And so , it is certainly possible that , somebody 's server would be down or something and they wouldn't actually hear from us , and then they find this thing is in there and we 've already distributed it to someone . So , what it says in there , in fact , is that they will be given an opportunity to blah - blah - blah , postdoc a:   professor b: but if in fact if we sent them something or we thought we sent them something but they didn't actually receive it for some reason , then we haven't given them that . grad f: Well , so how far do we have to go ? Do we need to get someone 's signature ? Or , is email enough ? professor b: I i i em email is enough .  , I 've been through this  , I 'm not a lawyer , but I 've been through these things a f things f like this a few times with lawyers now grad f:   phd c: Do you track , when people log in to look at the ? grad f:  . grad f: If they don't submit the form , it goes in the general web log . grad f: Right ? Cuz if someone just visits the web site that doesn't imply anything in particular . postdoc a: I I could get you on the notify list if you want me to . professor b: So again , hopefully , this shouldn't be quite as odious a problem either way , in any of the extremes we 've talked about because  , we 're talking a pretty small number of people . grad f: W For this set , I 'm not worried , because we basically know everyone on it . grad f: You know , they 're all more or less here or it 's it 's Eric and Dan and so on . But for some of the others , you 're talking about visitors who are gone from ICSI , whose email addresses may or may not work , professor b:   grad f: and So what are we gonna do when we run into someone that we can't get in touch with ? postdoc a: I don't think ,  They 're so recent , these visitors . postdoc a: They 're prominent enough that they 're easy to find through I  , I I w I 'll be able to if you have any trouble finding them , I really think I could find them .  , and I think , you know , if you go into a room and close the door and and ask their permission and they 're not there , it doesn't seem that that 's the intent of , meaning here .  , because they they filled out a contact information and that 's where I 'm sending the information . professor b: Well , the way ICSI goes , people , who , were here ten years ago still have acc have forwards to other accounts and so on . professor b: So it 's unusual that that they ,  grad f: So my original impression was that that was sufficient , that if they give us contact information and that contact information isn't accurate that we fulfilled our burden . postdoc a: I just professor b: So if we get to a boundary case like that then maybe I will call the attorney about it . professor b: and and and , you know , people people see long emails about things that they don't think is gonna be high priority , they typically , don't don't read it , or half read it . postdoc a: And actually , professor b: But postdoc a: I I didn't anticipate this so I that 's why I didn't give this comment , and it I this discussion has made me think it might be nice to have a follow - up email within the next couple of days saying " by the way , you know , we wanna hear back from you by X date and please " , and then add what Liz said " please , respond to please indicate you received this mail . " professor b: or e well , maybe even additionally , " Even if you 've decided you have no changes you 'd like to make , if you could tell us that " . You know , it makes you feel m like , if you were gonna p if you 're predicting that you might not answer , you have a chance now to say that . Whereas , I  , I would be much more likely myself , phd c: And the other th phd e: given all my email , t to respond at that point , saying " you know what , I 'm probably not gonna get to it " or whatever , rather than just having seen the email , thinking I might get to it , and never really , pushing myself to actually do it until it 's too late . I was I was thinking that it also lets them know that they don't have to go to the page to accept this . So that way they could they can see from that email that if they just write back and say " I got it , no changes " , they 're off the hook . phd c: They don't have to go to the web page professor b: the other thing I 've learned from dealing with dealing with people sending in reviews and so forth , is , if you say " you 've got three months to do this review " , people do it , you know , two and seven eighths months from now . professor b: If you say " you 've got three weeks to do this review " , they do do it , you know , two and seven eighths weeks from now they do the review . professor b: And ,  So , if we make it a little less time , I don't think it 'll be that much grad f: Well , and also if we want it ready by the fifteenth , that means we better give them deadline of the first , if we have any prayer of actually getting everyone to respond in time . professor b: There 's the responding part and there 's also what if , I hope this doesn't happen , what if there are a bunch of deletions that have to get put in and changes ? grad f: Right . professor b: if we want it to grad f: Ugh ! Disk space , postdoc a: By the way , has has Jeremy signed the form ? grad f: oh my god ! I hadn't thought about that . grad f: That for every meeting any meeting which has any bleeps in it we need yet another copy of . phd c: Do you have to do the other close - talking ? phd e: as well as all of these . phd e: You have to do all You could just do it in that time period , though , grad f: Yes . postdoc a: Well I you know , I think at a certain point , that copy that has the deletions will become the master copy . So I I don't want I really would rather make a copy of it , rather than bleep it out professor b: Are you del are you bleeping it by adding ? grad f: and then Overlapping . So what I really think is " bleep " professor b: I I I I understand , but is is it summing signals grad f: and then I want to professor b: or do you delete the old one and put the new one in ? grad f: I delete the old one , put the new one in . postdoc a: But And then w I was gonna say also that the they don't have to stay on the system , as you know , professor b: Yeah . postdoc a: cuz cuz the the ones grad f: Say again ? postdoc a: Once it 's been successfully bleeped , can't you rely on the ? phd c: Or we 'll tell people the frequency of the beep professor b: Encrypt it . postdoc a: Can't you rely on the archiving to preserve the older version ? phd h: Oh , yeah . You could encrypt it , you know , with a with a two hundred bit thousand bit ,  grad d: You can use spread spectrum . grad d: Then you have , like , subliminal , messages , grad f: But , ha you 've seen the this the speech recognition system that reversed very short segments . It 's just we 've had meeting after meeting after meeting a on this and it seems like we 've never gotten it resolved . And ,  and I 'm sorry responding without , having much knowledge , but the thing is , I am , like , one of these people who gets a gazillion mails and and stuff comes in as grad f: Well , and that 's exactly why I did it the way I did it , which is the default is if you do nothing we 're gonna release it . grad f: Because , you know , I have my stack of emails of to d to be done , that , you know , fifty or sixty long , and the ones at the top I 'm never gonna get to . professor b: So so the only thing we 're missing is is some way to respond to easily to say , " OK , go ahead " or something . So , i this is gonna mean phd c: Just re - mail them to yourself and then they 're at the bottom . The m email doesn't specify that you can just reply to the email , as op as opposed to going to the form postdoc a:   phd h: In postdoc a: And it also doesn't give a a specific I didn't think of it . grad f: and postdoc a: S I think it 's a good idea an ex explicit time by which this will be considered definite .  , I got email , and it i if I use a MIME - capable mail reader , it actually says , you know , click on this button to confirm receipt of the of the mail . phd h: So grad f: You you can grad d: It 's like certified mail . This is not So , I I know , you can tell , you know , the , mail delivery agent to to confirm that the mail was delivered to your mailbox . phd h: th there was a button that when you clicked on it , it would send , you know , a actual acknowledgement to the sender that you had actually looked at the mail . phd h: But it o but it only works for , you know , MIME - capable you know , if you use Netscape or something like that for your n grad f: Yeah . professor b: It 's not that you 've looked at it , it 's that you 've looked at it and and and agree with one of the possible actions . professor b: Right ? phd h: You know , you can put this button anywhere you want , professor b: Oh ? Oh , I see . phd h: and you can put it the bottom of the message and say " here , by you know , by clicking on this , I I agree  , you know , I acknowledge " professor b: That i i my first - born children are yours , and Yeah . Are ,  grad f: Well , I could put a URL in there without any difficulty and even pretty simple MIME readers can do that . postdoc a: But why shouldn't they just email back ? I don't see there 's a problem . phd h: I 'm just saying that grad f: Well , I cuz I use a text mail reader . phd h: if ev but I 'm phd e: Don't you use VI for your mai ? phd h: Yeah . phd h: So I i There 's these logos that you can put at the bottom of your web page , like " powered by VI " . phd e: Like , there were three meetings this time , or so postdoc a: Six . So I guess if you 're in both these types of meetings , you 'd have a lot . But How  , it also depends on how many Like , if we release this time it 's a fairly small number of meetings , but what if we release , like , twenty - five meetings to people ? In th grad f: Well , what my s expectation is , is that we 'll send out one of these emails every time a meeting has been checked and is ready . grad f: maybe Is that the way it 's gonna be , you think , Jane ? postdoc a: I agree with you . It 's we could do it ,  I I could I 'd be happy with either way , batch - wise What I was thinking  , so this one That was exactly right , that we had a  ,  I I had wanted to get the entire set of twelve hours ready . But , this was the biggest clump I could do by a time where I thought it was reasonable . My ,  I was thinking that with the NSA meetings , I 'd like there are three of them , and they 're  , I I will have them done by Monday .  , unfortunately the time is later and I don't know how that 's gonna work out , but I thought it 'd be good to have that released as a clump , too , because then , you know , they 're they they have a it it 's in a category , it 's not quite so distracting to them , is what I was thinking , and it 's all in one chu But after that , when we 're caught up a bit on this process , then , I could imagine sending them out periodically as they become available .  , it 's a question of how distracting it is to the people who have to do the checking . Adam had a script that will put everything back together and there was Well , there was one small problem but it was a simple thing to fix . Now we haven't actually had anyone go through that meeting , to see whether the transcript is correct and to see how much was missed and all that sort of stuff . There are a fair number of " yeahs " and "  - huhs " that it 's just that aren't in there . Like you said , that 's that 's gonna be our standard proc that 's what the transcribers are gonna be spending most of their time doing , I would imagine , postdoc a:   professor b: It 's gonna postdoc a: Do you suppose that was because they weren't caught by the pre - segmenter ? grad f: Yes , absolutely . So maybe when the detector for that gets better or something I w I There 's another issue which is this we 've been , contacted by University of Washington now , of course , to ,  We sent them the transcripts that correspond to those six meetings and they 're downloading the audio files . Yeah , I pointed them to the set that Andreas put , on the web so th if they want to compare directly with his results they can . And , then once , th we can also point them at the , the original meetings and they can grab those , too , with SCP . grad f: There 's another meeting in here , what , at four ? Right ? Yeah , so we have to finish by three forty - five . phd h: D d So , does Washi - does does UW wanna u do this wanna use this data for recognition or for something else ? phd c: for recognition . phd e: didn't they want to do language modeling on , you know , recognition - compatible transcripts phd h: Oh . postdoc a: This is to show you , some of the things that turn up during the checking procedure . phd e: or ? postdoc a:  @ @ So , this is from one of the NSA meetings and , i if you 're familiar with the diff format , the arrow to the left is what it was , and the arrow to the right is what it was changed to . The last time ,  " And the transcriber thought " little too much " But , really , it was " we learned too much " , which makes more sense syntactically as well . phd h: And these the parentheses were f from postdoc a: Then Oh , this that 's the convention for indicating uncertain . So the original was " So that 's not so Claudia 's not the bad master here " , and then he laughs , but it really " web master " . postdoc a: And then you see another type of uncertainty which is , you know , they just didn't know what to make out of that . grad d: Jane , these are from IBM ? grad f: Spit upon ? grad d: The top lines ? postdoc a: No , no . postdoc a: The transcribers transcriber 's version ver versus the checked version . The , version beyond this is So instead of saying " or " , especially those words , " also " and " oder " and some other ones . postdoc a: cuz it 's , like , below this it 's a little subliminal there . OK , then you got , instead of " from something - or - other cards " , it 's " for multicast " .  , and the final one , the transcriber had th " in the core network itself or the exit unknown , not the internet unknown " . And it it comes through as " in the core network itself of the access provider , not the internet backbone core " . postdoc a: but , you know in this this area it really does pay to ,  to double check and I 'm hoping that when the checked versions are run through the recognizer that you 'll see s substantial improvements in performance cuz the you know , there 're a lot of these in there . So how often ? grad f: Yeah , but I bet I bet they 're acoustically challenging parts anyway , though . grad f: Oh , really ?  , it 's Oh , so it 's just jargon .  this is cuz , you know you don't realize in daily life how much you have top - down influences in what you 're hearing . phd h: Well , but postdoc a: And it 's jar it 's jargon coupled with a foreign accent . phd h: But but But we don't  , our language model right now doesn't know about these words anyhow . phd h: you know , un until you actually get a decent language model , @ @ Adam 's right . postdoc a: Well , also from the standpoint of getting people 's approval , professor b: Yeah . postdoc a: cuz if someone sees a page full of  , barely decipherable w you know , sentences , and then is asked to approve of it or not , it 's ,  grad f: Did I say that ? professor b: Yeah . That would be a shame if people said " well , I don't approve it because the it 's not what I said " . grad f: Well , that 's exactly why I put the extra option in , professor b: Yeah . grad f: is that I was afraid people would say , " let 's censor that because it 's wrong " , professor b: Yeah . postdoc a: And then I also the final thing I have for transcription is that I made a purchase of some other headphones phd h: C postdoc a: because of the problem of low gain in the originals . And and they very much appro they mu much prefer the new ones , and actually I  , I I think that there will be fewer things to correct because of the the choice . Ugh ! postdoc a: but , they 're just not as good as these , in this with this respect to this particular task . postdoc a: I don't know exactly , grad f: But postdoc a: but we chose them because that 's what 's been used here by prominent projects in transcription . phd h: So you have spare headsets ? postdoc a: Sorry , what ? phd h: You have spare headsets ? grad f: They 're just earphones .  , just earphones ?  , because I , I could use one on my workstation , just to t because sometimes I have to listen to audio files and I don't have to b go borrow it from someone and postdoc a: We have actua actually I have W Well , the thing is , that if we have four people come to work for a day , I was I was hanging on to the others for , eh for spares , phd h: Oh , OK . postdoc a: It 'd just have to be a s a separate order an added order . phd e: Yeah , that We should order a cou  , t two or three or four , actually . phd e: We have phd h: I think I have a pair that I brought from home , but it 's f just for music listening professor b: No . phd e: Sh - Just get the model number phd h: and it 's not Nnn . grad f: W  , could you email out the brand ? postdoc a: Oh , sure . So what 's the other thing on the agenda actually ? grad f: the only one was Don wanted to , talk about disk space yet again . phd e: It 's one of these it 's it 's social professor b: It 's I i i it i phd e: and , discourse level grad d: Yeah . professor b: double double grad f: Yeah , it was really goo phd e: See , if I had that little scratch - pad , I would have made an X there . So , without thinking about it , when I offered up my hard drive last week grad f: Oh , no . I ,  I realized that we 're going to be doing a lot of experiments , o for this , paper we 're writing , so we 're probably gonna need a lot more We 're probably gonna need that disk space that we had on that eighteen gig hard drive . We just need to phd e: I think we need , like , another eighteen gig disk to be safe .  , I guess the thing is is , all I need is to hang it off , like , the person who 's coming in , Sonali 's , computer . phd h: Oh , so so , you mean the d the internal the disks on the machines that we just got ? grad d: Whew . grad d: So are we gonna move the stuff off of my hard drive onto that when those come in ? grad f: On phd h: Oh , oh . phd e: Do when when is this planned for roughly ? phd c: They should be I I imagine next week or something . So grad f: If you 're if you 're desperate , I have some space on my drive . grad d: I think if I 'm grad f: But I I vacillate between no space free and a few gig free . phd e: Well , each meeting is like a gig or something , grad f: It 's eventually real disk space . I was just going to comment that I I 'm going to , be on the phone with Mari tomorrow , late afternoon . She was re she was referring to it as I think this actually didn't just come from her , but this is what , DARPA had asked for . But of course the fiscal year starts in October , so I don't quite understand w w why we do an annual report that we 're writing in July . It 's that the meeting is in July so they so DARPA just said do an annual report . I 'll do it , you know , as much as I can without bothering people , just by looking at at papers and status reports . And if ,  if I have some questions I 'll grad f: When we remember to fill them out . If people could do it as soon as as you can , if you haven't done one si recently .  , but , you know , I 'm I 'm sure before it 's all done , I 'll end up bugging people for for more clarification about stuff . But , I don't know , I guess I guess I know pretty much what people have been doing . And if something hasn't ,  I 'll be talking to her late tomorrow afternoon , and if something hasn't been in a status report and you think it 's important thing to mention on this kind of thing , just pop me a one - liner and and and I 'll I 'll have it in front of me for the phone conversation . grad f: Not here , but later today ? grad d: We should probably talk off - line about when we 're gonna talk off - line . Yeah , I might want to get updated about it in about a week cuz , I 'm actually gonna have a a few days off the following week , a after the after the picnic . grad f: So we were gonna do sort of status of speech transcription automatic transcription , but we 're kind of running late . phd e: How long does it take you to save the data ? grad f: Fifteen minutes . grad f: ten minute phd e: Guess we should stop , like , twenty of at the latest . professor b: Well , I would love to hear about it , grad f: What do you have to say ? professor b: especially since grad f: I 'm interested , so professor b: Yeah . Well , I 'm gonna be on the phone tomorrow , so this is just a good example of the sort of thing I 'd like to hear about . professor b: Cuz he looked at you phd h: What ? professor b: and says you 're sketching . phd h: I I I I 'm not actually , I 'm not sure what ? Are we supposed to have done something ? grad f: No . grad f: Whew ! professor b: That was grad f: Dodged that bullet . phd e: Yeah , we 're phd h: the the next thing on our agenda is to go back and look at the ,  the automatic alignments because , I got some I I I learned from Thilo what data we can use as a benchmark to see how well we 're doing on automatic alignments of the background speech or , of the foreground speech with background speech . phd e: And then , I guess , the new data that Don will start to process phd h: But , we haven't actually phd e: the ,  when he can get these You know , before we were working with these segments that were all synchronous and that caused a lot of problems phd h: Mmm . phd e: And so that 's sort of a stage - two of trying the same kinds of alignments with the tighter boundaries with them is really the next step .  , but we 're hoping to have a paper for that as well , which should be an interesting grad f: When 's it due ? phd e: The t paper isn't due until August . phd e: But , the good news is that that will have sort of the European experts in prosody sort of a different crowd , and I think we 're the only people working on prosody in meetings so far , so that should be interesting . postdoc a: What 's the name of the meeting ? phd e: it 's ISCA Workshop on Prosody in Speech Recognition and Understanding , or something like that phd h: It 's called Prosody to grad f:   phd e: some generic  , so it 's focused on using prosody in automatic systems and there 's a  , a web page for it . Well , that th Hey , if that 's what it takes , that 's fine with me
grad b:  grad d: How many batteries do you go through ? grad b: Thank you . My suggestion is that Robert and Johno sort of give us a report on last week 's adventures  to start . So everybody knows there were these guys f  from Heidelber -  , actually from  DFKI  , part of the German SmartKom project , who were here for the week and , I think got a lot done . The we got to the point where we can now speak into the SmartKom system , and it 'll go all the way through and then say something like " Roman numeral one , am Smarticus . " It actually says , " Roemisch einz , am Smarticus , " grad b: OK . " grad d: " I am Sm - I am Smarticus " is what it 's saying . grad d: I gue grad e: The  sythesis is just a question of  , hopefully it 's just a question of exchanging a couple of files , once we have them . And , it 's not going to be a problem because we decided to stick to the so - called concept to speech approach . So I 'm I 'm I 'm going backwards now , so " synthesis " is where you sort of make this  , make these sounds , and " concept to speech " is feeding into this synthesis module giving it what needs to be said , and the whole syntactic structure so it can pronounce things better , presumably . Bu -  , i The way the  , the dialogue manager works is it dumps out what it wants to know , or what it wants to tell the person , to a er in XML and there 's a conversion system for different  , to go from XML to something else . And th so , the knowledge base for the system , that generates the syntasti syntactic structures for the ge generation is  , in a LISP - like the knowledge base is in a LISP - like form . So , you have a basically , a goal and it , you know , says " OK , well I 'm gonna try to do the Greet - the - person goal , grad b:   grad d: so it just starts  , it binds some variables and it just decides to , you know , do some subscold . grad e: But I think that the point is that out of the twelve possible utterances that the German system can do , we 've already written the the syntax trees for three or four . grad d: and instead of , you know , breaking down to , like , small units and building back up , they basically took the sentences , and basically cut them in half , or you know , into thirds or something like that , and made trees out of those . And so  ,  Tilman wrote a little tool that you could take LISP notation and generate an XML , tree . And so basically you just say , you know , " noun goes to " , you know , Er , nah , I don't re I 've never been good at those . So there 's like the VP goes to N and those things in LISP , and it will generate for you . grad e: And because we 're sticking to that structure , the synthesis module doesn't need to be changed . So all that f fancy stuff , and the Texas speech version of it , which is actually the simpler version , is gonna be done in October which is much too late for us . Right now it 's brittle and you need to ch start it up and then make ts twenty changes on on on on seventeen modules before they actually can stomach it , anything . And send in a a a couple of side queries on some dummy center set - up program so that it actually works because it 's designed for this seevit thing , where you have the gestural recognition running with this s Siemens virtual touch screen , which we don't have here . grad e: And so we 're doing it via mouse , but the whole system was designed to work with this thing and it was It was a lot of engineering stuff . No science in there whatsoever , but it 's working now , and  , that 's the good news . grad d: Why I had I did need to chan generate different trees than the German ones , mainly because you know like  , the gerund in in German is automatically taken care of with just a regular verb , grad e: You have to switch it on . grad d: so I 'd  have to add " am walking , " grad b: OK . grad d: or I 'd have to add a little stem for the " am " , when I build the built the tree . Yeah , I noticed that  , that some of the examples they had , had you know , non - English word orders and so on , you know . professor c: So it might be worth , Keith , you looking at this , grad b: Yeah . professor c:  grad b: I I still don't I still don't really understand e like grad d: Well Tilman s grad b:  we sort of say ,  You know , I I still don't exactly understand sort of the information flow  in in this thing , or what the modules are and so on . So , you know , like just that such - and - such module   decides that it wants to achieve the goal of greeting the user , and then magically it sort of s professor c: Yeah grad b: how does it know which syntactic structure to pull out , and all that ? professor c: I thi Yeah . professor c: but sort of when you get free and you have the time  either Robert or Johno or I can walk you through it .  , was this , I I think he talked about the idea of like ,  He was talking about these lexicalized  , tree adjoining grammars where you sort of for each word you ,  grad d: OK , you know how to do it ? grad b: For each lexical item , the lexical entry says what all the  trees are that it can appear in . If it turns out we can also give them lots more than that by , you know , tapping into other things we do , that 's great . professor c: But i it turns out not to be in an any of the contracts grad d: There 's like a little The twisty thing , you can move it with . So , the reason I 'd like you to understand  what 's going on in this demo system is not because it 's important to the research . So that if we come up with a question of " could we fit this deeper stuff in there ? " or something . professor c: So it 's just ,  in the sam same actually with the rest of us we just need to really understand what 's there . Is there anything we can make use of ?  , is there anything we can give back , beyond th the sort of minimum requirements ? But none of that has a short time fuse . professor c: So th the demo the demo requirements for this Fall are sort of taken care of as of later this week or something . And then So , it 's probably fifteen months or something until there 's another serious demo requirement . professor c: That doesn't mean we don't think about it for fifteen months , grad b: Right . The plan for this summer  , really is to step back from the applied project , grad e: Right . professor c: And , so The idea is there 's this  , other subgroup that 's worrying about formalizing the nota getting a notation . But sort of in parallel with that , the hope is tha in particularly you will work on constructions in English Ge - and German for this domain , grad b:   professor c: but y not worry about parsing them or fitting them into SmartKom or any of the other anything lik any other constraints for the time being . professor c: It 's hard enough to get it semantically and syntactically right and then and get the constructions in their form and stuff . professor c: And , I don I don't want you f feeling that you have to somehow meet all these other constraints . And similarly with the parsing ,  we 're gonna worry about parsing  , the general case you know , construction parser for general constructions . And , if we need a cut - down version for something , or whatever , we 'll worry about that later . grad b: So  , the the point is that like the meetings  so far that I 've been at have been sort of been geared towards this demo , professor c: Right . grad b: And then we 'll sort of shift gears a Fairly substantially , professor c: Yeah . What I what I think is is a good idea that I can can show to anyone who 's interested , we can even make a sort of an internal demo , and I I show you what I do , grad b:   grad e: And so you when somebody on the streets com comes up to you and asks you what is SmartKom so you can , sort of , give a sensible answer . professor c: So , c sh we could set that up as actually an institute wide thing ? Just give a talk in the big room , and and so peo people know what 's going on ? when you 're ready ? grad e: Absolutely . professor c: Yeah  , that 's the kind of thing That 's the level at which you know we can just li invite everybody and say " this is a project that we 've been working on and here 's a demo version of it " and stuff like that . Well d we we do wanna have all the bugs out b where you have to sort of pipe in extra XML messages from left and right before you 're grad b:  - huh . Actually , roughly starting  let 's say , nex next meeting , cuz this meeting we have one other thing to tie up besides the trip report .  there are a lot of issues , what 's the ontology look like , grad b:   professor c: you know what do the constructions look like , what 's the execution engine look like , mmm lots of things . Now before we do that , let 's get back in Oh ! But , it 's still , I think , useful for you to understand the demo version enough , so that you can can see what what it is that that  it might eventually get retro - fitted into or something . professor c: And Johno 's already done that , looked at the dem  the looked at the SmartKom stuff . grad d: Wa  To some de  what what part of th the SmartKom stuff ? professor c: Well , the parser , and that stuff . So , the trip the report on these the last we we sort of interrupted you guys telling us about what happened last week . Well it was just amazing to to see  how how instable the whole thing is , professor c: Maybe you 're done , then . grad e: and if you just take the And I g I got the feeling that we are the only ones right now who have a running system . I don't know what the guys in Kaiserslautern have running because e the version that is , the full version that 's on the server d does not work . And so it 's And even Tilman and Ralf sort of said " yeah there never was a really working version that  did it without th all the shortcuts that they built in for the  October @ @ version " . So we 're actually maybe ahead of the System Gruppe by now , the system the integration group . And it was ,  It was fun to some extent , but the  the outcome that is sort of of scientific interest is that I think both Ralf and Tilman  , I know that they enjoyed it here , and they r they they liked , a lot of the stuff they saw here , what what we have been thinking about , and they 're more than willing to to  , cooperate , by all means . And  , part of my responsibility is  to use our internal " group - ware " server at EML , make that open to all of us and them , so that whatever we discuss in terms of parsing and and generating and constructions w we we sort of  put it in there and they put what they do in there and maybe we can even  , get some overlap , get some synergy out of that . And  , the ,  If I find someone at in EML that is interested in that ,  I I may even think that we could look take constructions and and generate from them because the tree adjoining grammars that that Tilman is using is as you said nothing but a mathematical formalism . And you can just do anything with it , whether it 's syntactic trees , H P S G - like stuff , or whether it 's construction . So if you ever get to the generation side of constructing things and there might be something of interest there , but in the moment we 're of course definitely focused on the understanding , pipeline . professor c: Anyth - any other  repo visit reports sort of stories ?  we so we now know I think , what the landscape is like . And one of the things we need to do is the  , and this I think is relatively tight tightly constrained , is to finish up this belief - net stuff . And I was going to switch to start talking about that unless there 're m other more general questions . OK so here 's where we are on the belief - net stuff as far as I understand it . Going back I guess two weeks ago  Robert had laid out this belief - net , missing only the connections . Right ? That is So , he 'd put all th all the dots down , and we went through this , and , I think , more or less convinced ourselves that at least the vast majority of the nodes that we needed for the demo level we were thinking of , were in there . So ,  Bhaskara and I went off and looked at some technical questions about were certain operations sort of legitimate belief - net computations and was there some known problem with them or had someone already  , solved you know how to do this and stuff . The answer seems to be  , " no , no one has done it , but yes it 's a perfectly reasonable thing to do if that 's what you set out to do " . And , so the current state of things is that , again , starting now ,  we 'd like to actually get a running belief - net for this particular subdomain done in the next few weeks . So Bhaskara is switching projects as of the first of June , and  , he 's gonna leave us an inheritance , which is a  hopefully a belief - net that does these things . And there 're two aspects to it , one of which is , you know , technical , getting the coding right , and making it run , and  stuff like that . OK ? What all you know , what are the considerations and how and what are the ways in which they relate . So he doe h he doesn't need help from this group on the technical aspects or if he does  we 'll do that separately . professor c: But in terms of what are the decisions and stuff like that , that 's something that we all have to work out . Is is that right ?  that 's that 's both you guys ' understanding of where we are ? grad e: Absolutely . grad g: So , I guess ,  Is there like a latest version of the belief - net of the proposed belief - net ? Like grad e: We had  decided grad g: like grad e:  . We wanted to look into maybe getting it , the visualization , a bit clearer , but I think if we do it , sort of a paper version of all the nodes and then the connections between them , that should suffice . grad d: Yeah , I professor c: We do in the long run wanna do better visualization and all that stuff . grad d: I did look into that ,  in terms of , you know , exploding the nodes out and down ag professor c: Yep . It 'd probably take two weeks or so to actually go through and do it , professor c: Not not at this point . grad d: and I went through all the other packages on Murph - Kevin Murphy 's page , professor c: Right . grad d: and I couldn't find the necessary mix of free and  with the GUI and , with this thing that we want . OK , so then I 'll go back and look at the ones on the list that professor c: OK . grad e: But grad g: Yeah , the one that  people seem to use is  Hugin or whatever ? professor c: Hugin , yeah that 's free . grad g: How exp I don't think it 's Is it free ? Because I 've seen it advertised in places so I it seems to professor c: it may be free to academics . professor c:  but yo I noticed people do use Hugin so  , grad d: How do you spell that ? professor c: HUGIN . So then , in any case ,  But paying a lit You know , if i if it 's  Probably for university , it 's it 's gonna be real cheap anyway . grad e: I I also s would suggest not to d spend two weeks in in in changing the the JavaBayes code . grad e: I I will send you a pointer to a Java applet that does that , it 's sort of a fish - eye . You you have a node , and you click on it , and it shows you all the connections , grad d: Mmm . grad e: and then if you click on something else that moves away , that goes into the middle . If that doesn't work , it 's not a problem we we need to solve right now . What I 'm what my job is , I will , give you the input in terms of of the internal structure . Maybe node by node , or something like this ? Or should I collect it all grad g:   grad g: just any like like sort of rough representation of the entire belief - net is probably best . And  you 're gonna be around ? t again , always Tuesdays and Thursdays afternoon - ish ? As usual ? Or will that change ? grad g: Yeah  , yeah , I can like I c  . This week I guess  , kind of I have a lot of projects and stuff but after that I will generally be more free . professor c: Yeah and this is not a crisis that  , you do , e everybody who 's a student should , you know do their work , get their c courses all in good shape and and and and then we 'll dig d dig down on this . grad b: How do you go about this process of deciding what these connections are ? I know that there 's an issue of how to weight the different things too , and stuff . grad e: It 's professor c: One is you design and the other is you learn . OK ? So  what we 're gonna do initially is is do design , and , i if you will , guess .  that is you know use your best knowledge of of the domain to  , hypothesize what the dependencies are and stuff . professor c: If it 's done right , and if you have data then , there are techniques for learning the numbers given the structure grad b: Yeah . professor c: and there are even techniques for learning the structure , although that takes a lot more data , and it 's not as @ @ and so forth and so on . So  but for the limited amount of stuff we have for this particular exercise I think we 'll just design it . Fo - Hopefully as time passes we 'll get more and more data from Heidelberg and from people actually using it and stuff . grad e: But to solve our problems ag  a mediocre design will do I think in the beginning . Yeah , oh , and by the way , speaking of data , are there I could swore  , I could swear I saw it sitting on someone 's desk at some point , but is there a  a transcript of any of the , sort of , initial interactions of people with the with the system ? Cuz you know , I 'm still sort of itching to to look at what look at the stuff , and see what people are saying . So and and , of course Keith would like the German as well as the English , so whatever you guys can get . Yeah ,  I I sort of  found the  ,  the audio of some of those , and  , it kind of sounded like I didn't want to trudge through that , you know . professor c: OK , so while we 're still at this sort of top level , anything else that we oughta talk about today ? grad e: Ho - how was your thingy . grad b: Oh , I just wanted to , s like mention as an issue , you know last meeting I wasn't here because I went to a linguistics colloquium on the fictive motion stuff , professor c: Oh right . grad b: and that was pretty interesting and you know , seems to me that that will fairly obviously be of relevance to  to what we 're doing here because you know people are likely to give descriptions like you know , " What 's that thing  right where you start to go up the hill , " or something like that , you know , meaning a few feet up the hill or whatever from some reference point and all that stuff so  , I 'm sure in terms of you know , people trying to state locations or , you know , all that kind of stuff , this is gonna be very relevant . So , now that was the talk was about English versus Japanese , which obviously the Japanese doesn't affect us directly , except that , some of the construction he 'd what he talked about was that you know in English we say things like th you know , " your bike is parked across the street " and we use these prepositional phrases , you know , " well , if you were to move across the street you would be at the bike " , but  in in Japanese the the more conventionalized tendency is to use a sort of a description of " where one has crossed to the river , there is a tree " .  , and you know , you can actually say things like , " there 's a tree where one has crossed the river , but no one has ever crossed the river " , or something like that . So the idea is that this really is you know that 's supposed show that 's it 's really fictive and so on . But  But the point is that that kind of construction is also used in English , you know , like " right where you start to go up the hill " , or " just when you get off the train " , or something like that to  , to indicate where something is . grad b: So we 'll have to think about professor c: So how much is that used in German ? grad e:  . grad e: the the Deep Map project which  is undergoing some renovation at at the moment , but this is a a three language project : German , English , Japanese . grad e: And  , we have a  ,  I have taken care that we have the the Japanese generation and stuff . Well , if yo if you 're interested in that , so how how ,  it does sort of go d all the way down to the conceptual level to some extent . professor c: So , where is this huge project ? grad e: It 's KLEIST . grad e:  professor c: Well , that may be another thing that Keith wants to look at . grad e: But  , I I think we should leave Japanese constructions maybe outside of the scope for for now , grad b: Yeah . phd a: Are are you going to p pay any attention to the relative position of of the direction relative relative to the speaker ? For example , there are some differences between Hebrew and English . We can say  " park in front of the car " as you come beh you drive behind the car . In Hebrew it means " park behind the car " , because to follow the car is defined as it faces you . phd a: So , i i i is German  closer to to E  ,  to E   grad e:   phd a: I don't think it it 's related to syntax , though , so it may be entirely different . Did you ever get to look at the the rou paper that I sent you on the on that problem in English and German ? grad b: I think grad e: Carroll , ninety - three . grad e: So it 's they actually say " the monkey in front of the car , where 's the monkey ? " grad b:   grad e: And , they found statistically very significant differences in English and German , so I I I It might be , since there are only a finite number of ways of doing it , that that German might be more like Hebrew in that respect . phd a: That but it wasn't was grad e: That syntactic facto factors do do play a role there , wh whether you 're more likely , you know , to develop  , choices that lead you towards using  intrinsic versus extrinsic reference frames . grad b: it seems to me that you can get both in in English depending o professor c:  . grad b: You know , like , " in front of the car " could you know Like , here 's the car sideways to me in between me and the car or something 's in front of the car , or whatever . grad b: but But anyway , so you know , this was this was a a very good talk on those kinds of issues and so on . grad e: I can also give you  , a pointer to a paper of mine which is the the ultimate taxonomy of reference frames . " reference frames " ? grad e: It 's called a phd a:   grad e: It 's it 's spatial reference frames . You can either do a two - point or a three - point which is you You 're familiar with th with the " origo " ? where that 's the center " Origo " is the center of the f frame of reference . professor c: So that would be " origin " in English , grad f: This was like grad b: The origin . grad e: And three - point relations is if something has an intrinsic front side like this chair then your f shoe is behind the chair . You you can actually say things like , " it 's behind the tree from me " or something like that , I think , in in in certain circumstances in English , right ? As sort of " from where I 'm standing it would appear that " grad e: Yeah . professor c: Yeah , it sounds like it , doesn't it , grad b: Yeah . Egocentric two - point , egocentric three - point , or you can have allocentric . grad e: So , " as seen from the church , the town hall is right of that  , fire station " . aa - huh It 's hardly ever used but it 's w phd a: I 'd love to see it if you if you have a copy kind of . Well , why don't you just put it on the web page ? There 's this EDU Right ? grad e: Yeah it 's or or just Yeah . professor c: By the way , there something that I didn't know until about a week ago or so , is apparently , there are separate brain areas for things within reach , and things that are out of reach . professor c: So there 's there 's  all this linguistic stuff about you know , near and far , or yon and and so forth . That , you know they do MRI , and and if you 're  got something within reach then there 's one of your areas lights up , and if something 's out of reach  a different one . So there 's a a line on the wall over there , and you give them a laser pointer , and you say , " Where 's the midpoint ? " And they do fine . There 's just that part of the brain isn't functioning , so they can't do that . The same thing on the wall , you give them a laser , " where is it ? " , grad b:   Give them a stick , long stick , and say " do it " , they can't do it . So they doubled the the end the end of this grad f: Because it 's within reach now ? grad b: Yeah , professor c: It 's not within reach and you use the Within - Reach  , mechanism . professor c: And so this doe This is ,  First of all , it explains something that I 've always wondered about and I 'll do this this test on you guys as well . How - I have had an experience , not often , but a certain number of times , when , for example , I 'm working with a tool , a screwdriver or something , for a long time , I start feeling the tip directly . professor c: And people who are  accomplished violinists and stuff like that , claim they also have this kind of thing where you get a direct sensation of , physical sensation , of the end affector . What 's going on at the end of the tool , phd a: The ext the the The extension , grad b: yeah . professor c: Huh ? grad b: What 's going on at the end of the tool , or whatever .  i i it 's not exactly the th same thing , but but s it it it 's getting close to that . grad f: W what does it feel like ? professor c: Oh i it feels like your as if your  neurons had extended themselves out to this tool , and you 're feeling forces on it and so forth and and you deal directly with it . phd a: I once I I was playing you know with those   devices that allow you to manipulate objects when it 's dangerous to get close ? So you can insert your hand something grad b: Oh , OK . phd a: Very kind of you stop back and suddenly it goes away and you have to kind of work again to recapture it , but yeah . professor c: Right , Yeah , so anyway , so So this was the first actual experimental evidence I 'd seen that was consistent with this anecdotal stuff . So in addition to e ego and allocentric  which appear all over the place , you also apparently have this proximal - distal thing which is very deeply  embedded . S grad e: Well , Dan Montello sort of , he he does the   th the cognitive map world , down in Santa Barbara . And he he always talks about these He he already well i probably most likely without knowing this this evidence  is talking about these small scale spaces that you can manipulate versus large scale environmental spaces . Well there 's there 's  been a lot of behavioral things o on this , but that was the first neur neuro - physiological thing I saw . We 're starting to do science , right ? And so these issues about  , reference , and spatial reference , discourse reference ,  -  -  -  all this sort of stuff , deixis which is part of what you were talking about , grad b:   And so , in addition to the business about just getting the linguistics right , and the formalism and stuff , we 're actually gonna build something and  , Johno is point person on the parser , analyzer , whatever that is , and we 're gonna start on that in parallel with the  , the grammar stuff . professor c: But to do that we 're gonna need to make some decisions like ontology , so ,  And so this is another thing where we 're gonna , you know , have to get involved and make s relatively early I think , make some decisions on  , " is there an ontology API that that " There 's a sort of standard way of getting things from ontologies and we build the parser and stuff around that , or is there a particular ontology that we 're gonna standardize on , and if so For example , is there something that we can use there . i Does  either the  SmartKom project or one of the projects at EML have something that we can just p pull out , for that . But we aren't gonna ignore those cuz we 're we 're not only going The plan is not only to lay out this thing , but to actually  build some of it . Part of it , if it works right , is wh It looks like we 're now in a position that the construction analyzer that we want for this applied project can be the same as the construction analyzer that Nancy needs for the child language modeling . It 's always been out of phase but it now seems that  , there 's a good shot at that . So we 've talked about it , and the hope is that we can make these things the same thing , grad b: OK . professor c: and of course it 's only w In both cases it 's only one piece of a bigger system . To to come full circle on that , this formalization task , OK ? is trying to get the formalism into into a shape where it can actually  grad b: Yeah . Be of use to someone who 's trying to do this , right ? professor c: d Well , yeah , where it actually is is covers the whole range of things . And the the the the thing that got Mark into the worst trouble is he had a very ambitious thing he was trying to do , and he insisted on trying to do it with a limited set of mechanisms . professor c: and he seemed fully committed to both sides of this i i irreconcilable thing . So there 's you know sort of , yeah , deep , really deep , emotional commitment to a certain theory being  , complete . grad f: You don't have a hidden purist streak ? grad d: Oh no . professor c: We - well it hasn't it it certainly hasn't been observed , in any case . Why a actually , the thing is , you you do but , th the thing you have to im implement is so small that  . professor c: Within that , yeah , grad f: Yes , professor c: and  , it 's a and still , I think , you know , get something done . grad b: Cool ! professor c: But to try to do something upscale and purist Particularly if if  what you 're purist about doesn't actually work , is real hard . And then the other thing is while we 're doing this  Robert 's gonna pick a piece of this space , phd a: It 's possible yeah . grad e: The - th There there 's a drive - in thesis  sh joint over in Saarbruecken . But , But anyway , so , that 's  , also gotta be worked out , hopefully over the next few weeks , so that that it becomes clear  , what piece  , Robert wants to jump into . And , while we 're at this level , there 's at least one new doctoral student in computer science who will be joining the project , either next week or the first of August , depending on the blandishments of Microsoft . Nobody believed th th that grad f: Yeah , I thought it had to be a joke , of your part , you know professor c: Yeah . " grad g: Is this person someone who 's in first - year this year , professor c: No , first year coming . grad g: or professor c: So , she 's she 's now out here she 's moved , and she 'll be a student as of then . professor c: And probably she 'll pick up from you on the belief - net stuff , so sh she 'll be chasing you down and stuff like that . grad f: We always get these people who are not in the class , who professor c: Some of th some of them , yeah . professor c: So anyway , but  she 's another one of these ones with a three point nine average and so forth and so on . Oh there 's yet another one of the incoming first incoming first - year graduate students who 's expressed interest , so we 'll see how that goes .  , anyway , so , I think as far as this group goes , it 's certainly worth continuing for the next few weeks to get closure on the  belief - net and the ideas that are involved in that , and what are th what are the concepts . We 'll see whether it 's gonna make sense to have this be separate from the other bigger effort with the formalization stuff or not , I 'm not sure . And then , Ami , you can decide , you know , how much time you wanna put into it and  , it it 's beginning to take shap shape , phd a: OK . professor c: so  and , phd a: Right professor c: I think you will find that if you want to look technically at some of the your traditional questions in this light ,  Keith , who 's buil building constructions , will be quite happy to  see what , you know , you envision as the issues and the problems and  , how they might  get reflected in constructions . phd a: I I may have to go to Switzerland for in June or beginning of July for between two weeks and four weeks , but  , after that or before that . And , if it 's useful we can probably arrange for you to drop by and visit either at Heidelberg or at the German AI center , while you 're in in the neighborhood . Yeah be  actu actually I 'm invited to do some consulting with a bank in Geneva which has an affiliation with a research institute in Geneva , which I forgot the name of . professor c: Well , we we 're connected to  There 's a there 's a a very significant connection between We 'll we 'll go through this , phd a: Yeah . professor c: ICSI and EPFL , which is the ,  It 's the Fr Ge - Germany 's got two big technical institutes . professor c: E T and then there 's one , the French speaking one , in Lausanne , grad b: Oh , so in Switzerland . Yeah , and so anyway we c  We can m undoubtedly get Ami  to give a talk at  EML or something like that . I I think the one you you gave here a couple of weeks ago would be of interest there , too . Actually , either place , DFKI or  Yeah , so , and and if there is a book , that you 'll be building up some audience for it . professor c: Cuz they 've actually these DFKI guys have done as much as anyone over the last decade in trying to build them . So , unless we wanna start digging into the  the belief - net and the decisions now , which would be fine , it 's probably grad e: I I tho It 's probably better if I come next week with the  version O point nine of the structure . So , how about if you two guys between now and next week come up with something that is partially proposal , and partially questions , saying " here 's what we think we understand , here are the things we think we don't understand " . professor c: OK ?  , " these are the decisions " I don't think we 're gonna get lots more information . grad e: And  , the the sem semester will be over next week but then you have projects for one more week to come ? grad g: No , I I think I 'll be done everything by this  by the end of this week . This Well , I 've I have projects , but then the my prof professor of one of my classes also wa has a final that he 's giving us . professor c: OK , so I guess that 's grad d: So , the seventeenth will definitely be the last day , like it or not for me . So let 's do this , and then we we well there 's gonna be some separate co these guys are talking ,  we have a group on the formalization ,  Nancy and Johno and I are gonna talk about parsers . professor c: Of course , nothing gets done even in a meeting of seven people , grad b: Right . professor c: right ? So , two or three people is the size in which actual work gets done . Oh , the other thing we wanna do is catch up with  , Ellen and see what she 's doing because the  image schemas are going to be  , an important pa grad b: Yeah . Yeah , I 'm actually probably going to be in contact with her  pretty soon anyway because of various of us students were going to have a reading group about precisely that sort of thing over the summer , grad d: OK . professor c: That 's great ! Yeah , I I Shweta mentioned that , although she said it 's a secret . grad d: Hi grad b: Right , no faculty ! professor c: Th - the faculty aren't faculty aren't supposed to know . professor c: But  , I 'm sufficiently clueless that I count as a grad b: Yeah , right . It 's as if we didn't tell anyone at all , grad d: Bhaskara
we're gonna discuss the look and feel design , the user interface design , and we're gonna evaluate the product . And the end result of this meeting has to be a decision on the details of this remote control , like absolute final decision ,  and then I'm gonna have to specify the final design in the final report . So  just from from last time to recap , we said we were gonna have a snowman shaped remote control with no L_C_D_ display , no need for talk-back , it was hopefully gonna be kinetic power and battery  with rubber buttons , maybe backlighting the buttons with some internal L_E_D_s to shine through the casing ,  hopefully a jog-dial , and incorporating the slogan somewhere as well . user interface: well look at the expense sheet , and  it turned to be quite a lot expensive to have open up and have lots of buttons and stuff inside , project manager:  . user interface: so instead we've  this is gonna be an L_C_D_ screen ,  just a a very very basic one , very small  with access to the menu through the the scroll wheel and  confirm  button . user interface: apart from that , it's just pretty much the same as we discussed last time . industrial designer: And there isn't  d it doesn't open up to the advanced functions ? the advanced functions are still hidden from you , but they're hidden in the sense that  they're not in use . marketing: Where are they ? industrial designer:  they're in the L_C_D_ panel and the jog-dial ? marketing: Ah , right . industrial designer: Okay 'cause project manager: So w what kind of thing  is gonna be marketing: Great . user interface: industrial designer: The L_C_D_ panel just displays  functionally what you're doing . If you're using an advanced function right , like  c brightness , contrast , whatever , it will just say marketing: Right . industrial designer: You know it's like it only has four columns , it's a very simple L_C_D_ like , whereas many the minimum amount we need that the user will automatically know like this is brightness or this is contrast . industrial designer: It might even be one , a bit more complex L_C_D_ panel with pictures like maybe the sun or the , you know , the the symbols of the various functions . project manager: Where are we gonna have the slogan ? industrial designer:  they're al along this user interface: You know , just like right inside there . industrial designer: You have this space here , and then you have this thing on the side as well , or at the bottom . project manager: industrial designer: 'Cause slogans are usually quite small , right , project manager: Okay . industrial designer: say a button's about this size , right , so you would still have plenty of space for a slogan , say even for that . project manager: So if this isn't to scale , what kind of dimensions are you thinking about here ? user interface: Well we want the other buttons to be big enough to push easily with a finger project manager: user interface: so we reckon maybe that'll be about the same size as the palm of your hand . industrial designer: Yep so that would be about a centimetre for a button , so one two three four centimetres . marketing: That'd be good , in fact a pen is about ten centimetres usually , so that would be that sounds like a really good size , if you see it there . Is these are these the colours that of production , or is this just what we had available ? user interface: Well I'm We're gonna have again the the sort of the foggy  yellow from last time that lit up when you pushed the button . project manager: Okay so just user interface:  project manager: could you just list all the things that it does s so I can write them in the report . user interface: But  this button  , because it's red it's sort of very prominent , we're gonna use it as  it can be the power button if you hold it for maybe two seconds it'll send a stand-by signal . user interface:  apart from that it's gonna be used as a confirm button for the L_C_D_ screen industrial designer: Sure . industrial designer: Oh we've discussed how h high it is , but how wide is it ? user interface: I don't know . marketing: How high is it ? industrial designer: No as in the height , but what about the width ? marketing: Yeah . project manager: Oh is this k to get an idea of scale from your from your thing there okay . project manager: So you can power on and off , what else can you do ? marketing: Three and a half . user interface: were gonna have the volume control here , but  because we've got the the L_C_D_ and the jog-dial we just thought we'd  use that as the volume . user interface:  you can use it for  more advanced functions like contrast , colour and project manager: Contrast , brightness , user interface:  yeah . project manager: yeah , and anything else ? user interface:  just whatever else we wanted to include as the advanced functions ,  we didn't actually go through and specify the project manager: Well of the designers what are they ? user interface:  what can a T_V_ do ? industrial designer: Okay things like  brightness , contrast , project manager: -huh . Are you having a V_C_R_ , are you having you know which input do you have ? marketing: - , industrial designer: Audio , we have like your basic y your base , your mid-range , your high range . industrial designer: Yep , left-right balance ,  maybe even pre-programmed sound modes , like  the user could determine like a series of sound modes , project manager: Okay . industrial designer: and then what could happen would be  when you click on that then it would go to that setting . project manager: is there anything else at all it can do ? That 'cause that's that's fine . Okay  right I g I guess that's it , so we can now  We can now have a little look at the the Excel sheet and price listing , and see if we need to  if we need to rethink anything at all . project manager: So  for this first part here power-wise , have we got battery ? industrial designer: The battery . industrial designer: We need an project manager: And that's because of cost restraints is it ? industrial designer: Yep . project manager:  what about the electronics here ? industrial designer: We need an advanced chip I think , yep . project manager: Okay  the case , what does it mean by single and double , do you know ? user interface:  I think single would just be sort of one sort of oval whereas double is this sort of thing . project manager: Is there any rubber at all in the buttons or any industrial designer: I think we're gonna have to skip the rubber . project manager: So I'll have to put that Oh no wait we ho how many colours have we got there ? industrial designer: For the case itself , one colour . industrial designer: 'Cause the case unit itself , the rest of our components go on top of it . project manager: Okay so interface-wise , is it this third option we have , the two of them there ? marketing:  . project manager: Okay and then buttons , we have what , two colours ? industrial designer: How many user interface:  we have  got some push buttons as well . user interface: So I reckon we've got one button for this thing 'cause it's just one big sheet of rubber . user interface: I'm not sure if that counts but industrial designer: Okay let's just be safe and put like say four buttons for that one . user interface: You can see we're we're all very far beyond the project manager: So w why are we arriving at the number four ? Where does the number four come from ? industrial designer: 'Cause that's one button by its the complexity of twelve buttons . project manager: Okay right , industrial designer: So we're just estimating that yeah it would be less . user interface: industrial designer: project manager: Now we're gonna something's gonna have to go .  we're at sixteen point eight and marketing:  how - how are we going to achieve this high-end product if project manager: Well we h something has to go to the tune of two point t three Euro , marketing: We only have very sparse project manager: so let me see , what are we  marketing: Two point three ? Four point three no ? project manager: oh yes sorry , four point three . user interface: Well we could take out ones by making it single curved , just fill in those bits . industrial designer: How much would that save us ? marketing: And then where is the project manager: How much would that save us ? industrial designer: That will only save you one . industrial designer: The other thing could be that  you could take away the L_C_D_ panel and the advanced chip together , project manager: One . industrial designer:  because when you do something on the T_V_ , the T_V_ responds and reacts as well , marketing: industrial designer: so the user could be looking at the T_V_ and pushing his thing so we may not need to user interface: That's fair enough , yeah . industrial designer: so when we scroll we need just some way to get the T_V_ to respond , marketing: industrial designer: which I think is a technically doable thing so project manager: Okay so marketing:  and we ha where are the four the four push buttons are where exactly now ? industrial designer: The twelve buttons that you see there . user interface: That's  one piece of rubber but it's gonna have twelve button things underneath so project manager: Yeah . industrial designer: Functionally you're gonna have to intercept So four is a good estimate for project manager: Do you think ? industrial designer: Yeah , so you can't actually cut It's like three times the number of buttons , four , eight , twelve . project manager: Like is is that one big button or is it twelve buttons , industrial designer: It It needs to be more than one big button because if you open up your phone , underneath there's actually one button underneath , it's just that the panel itself is a single panel . marketing: industrial designer: or the colours , you could take away s colours for th for the buttons . project manager: Well do you want colour differentiation here ? industrial designer: No that's not the button we're talking about . industrial designer: the buttons only refer to the pad so project manager: Right so industrial designer: Should we take that off  ? project manager: Ah . industrial designer:  so then these just become normal coloured buttons , so that might be some some way of cutting the cost . marketing: user interface: So I reckon project manager:  marketing: How about with embossing the logo , isn't that going to cost us some money ? project manager: Doesn't say so . Just one ? Does that mean that one button has a special form or user interface: I think there's just one button so project manager: Yeah okay . So we're not gonna have the L_C_D_ anymore , and we'll just gonna have an on t on the T_V_ it'll show you what you're doing , which I think is fair enough , and so this is gonna be one big thing here . marketing: Was the goal in your in your prototype design that it be as low profile as possible ? industrial designer: What do you mean by profile ? marketing: Sort of flat as possible . user interface: sort of deep enough to be comfy to hold in your hands rather than being wide and flat . marketing: Yeah that's what I was thinking , to industrial designer: We didn't have enough Play-Doh to make it three D_ . industrial designer: So there's one more dimension to the thing which we need to to add , marketing: project manager: So just to well to be thorough then , width-wise we're looking at about what three centimetres or something ? industrial designer: Yeah . project manager: How how tall do you envisage it being ? About that big ? industrial designer: Two . Okay so can we close that ? This is what it's the final spec that it's gonna be . marketing:  it's probably just I dunno if it's worth getting into , but  just in in that we want this to be stylish , should we think a little bit more out of the box in terms of a button grid , because I've seen there's lots of devices out there that that instead of taking your standard nine nine square grid , and they have it sort of stylized or in different concept that that industrial designer: I think that's something that's very hard to catch , marketing: Yeah . industrial designer: The the look and the colour is something which is cool , marketing: Yeah , alright . industrial designer: but I think that there's also that factor of if it's too unfamiliar marketing: Okay , sure . industrial designer: then  because when you put it on the shelf marketing: What about button shape ? Square buttons ? industrial designer: Yeah button shape might be a good idea to change , rather than rather than positioning , marketing: Okay . industrial designer: 'cause I think positioning is we're kinda engrained into the the telephone kind of marketing: Yeah . So at this point we  , let me see , discuss  how satisfied we all are with  with these four points , with the room for creativity in the project , and leadership and teamwork , and the stuff we had around us I guess . project manager: let me see  marketing: Do you want me to d  Do you want me to do my  design evaluation last ? industrial designer: Maybe we should do the design evaluation first . project manager: Yeah I wasn't really sure what that was marketing: Or project manager: Yeah marketing: Evaluation .  , alright so the way this works , I'm gonna need to plug into PowerPoint , project manager: Okay . industrial designer: I don't think you need the power , marketing: industrial designer: so marketing: What's that ? industrial designer: No , that's okay that's okay . marketing: I don't need the PowerPoint ? industrial designer: No , the power cord itself . marketing: Oh course , industrial designer: Yeah , so then you have a bit more freedom to marketing: yeah that's true . marketing: so what this is is a set-up for us to   use a kind of a like a user interface: Is it ? industrial designer: You killed a monster . user interface: marketing: The idea is that I've set up I've reviewed all of the  the points of discussion from the beginning , and used that as a criteria of evaluation for the   for the current design  th or the plan , and  so we can review that .  I think it's gonna end up being sort of elementary because we're sort we're in n we're not gonna probably use it to change anything but Doesn't seem like it's going , does it ? project manager: Oh there it is .  and I'm gonna write up our results on the board , so this'll be a way for us to go through and decide if we're  sort of review where we stand with it . Okay , so  So to sort of b bring together two things , sort of design goals and also the market research that we had ,  when we rate this , one is v high in in succeeding or fitting to our original aim and seven is low , project manager:  'kay . So these i these i th are the and  we've been asked to  to collectively rate this , so what we can do is try and just y work on a consensus system so we just come to an agreement . project manager: What does anybody else think ? marketing: Yeah  me  my only reservation with it was that we basically went with yellow because it's the company's colour , project manager:  . industrial designer: It's one to seven , right ? project manager: Oh yes marketing: The project manager: sorry then marketing: So it meant three , project manager: then I would say two or three . industrial designer: Wait , what's the scale , one to seven , right ? project manager: Yeah . user interface: One's high-ish isn't it ? Ah , okay so yeah , two or three . project manager: Well it has the wee jog-dial marketing: We had to remove project manager: but marketing: Yeah , so we've had to remove a few of our features we wanted , project manager:  . marketing: but jog-dial industrial designer: Say it's more project manager: I'd go with three or four , marketing: 's good . marketing: I shouldn't have said colour , but just industrial designer: Okay , the blue the blue colours and don't re don't actually represent the colour , project manager: Well that's kind of marketing: Sorta . industrial designer: Yeah , the the yellow is more representative of the colour , project manager: couldn't it ? industrial designer: but the button itself , the blue can be anything else . project manager: Well yeah ,  it's really basic looking isn't it ? marketing: F f yeah f fairly basic , project manager:  I'd give that nearly a one .  , soft and spongy , have we achieved that ? We've used mostly plastic in the end so it's going to be quite a bit of a compromise for price . marketing: That's user interface: so it's probably gonna be marketing:  industrial designer: Yeah , company logo . marketing: could we have used an entirely rubber frame to it ? Was that an option ? industrial designer: I think it'll be cost prohibitive , user interface: I think I'd probably increase the cost . marketing: Okay , logo , we've got it in there , haven't we ? industrial designer: Yep . Gonna have that on the side , aren't we , like there or something ? marketing: Huh . marketing: Okay , so we can say then that  out of a possible or what would be our goal here ? project manager: Out of forty nine , I guess . marketing: I think 'cause if you turn that into a hundred it would be about project manager: Twice that , marketing: about thirty one , project manager: about thirty one . marketing: and then invert that , it's project manager: So yeah ab well yeah about sixty nine , seventy percent yeah . project manager: Is that you all have all finished , or marketing: Yeah that's that's me . I did have one other  one other frame I thought ,  I I d not knowing how we would deal with this information , I thought okay in theory this kind of a process would be about refining our design , revisiting our original goals . marketing: It's not something I need to p push through , but I thought should we thinking more about the dimensions ,  sort of like more of a three dimensional shapes as well as opposed to just that flat  project manager: marketing: Could our design involve a series of colours so that it's more of like a line where we have like sort of the , I don't know like the harvest line or the vibrant , industrial designer: Yep . marketing: I dunno the Whatever just some theme and then we have different tones , lime green , lemon . project manager: Okay , great  are you submitting the the  evaluation criteria or am I ? I don't know what your instructions have been . project manager:  just wondering if I need to include it in the minutes , user interface: project manager: because if you're submitting it anyway then marketing: I will , yeah . industrial designer: 'Kay I'm I'm listening I'm just trying to incorporate the logo into the the thing , so I'm playing with the Play-Doh as well . user interface: industrial designer: Just in case you're wondering , why is he still playing with the Play-Doh ? marketing: Huh . industrial designer: Just about right user interface: industrial designer: L_E_G_O_ Lego .  well do you wanna  just individually say what you think about about these four points and or not those four points , my four points , sorry , forgotten that .  do you wanna start Andrew ? marketing: Sure ,  so what is it you're asking of me now ? project manager: I don't know , just  your opinion on those four those four points really and how we used them . The the room  is fairly institutional , but  the main thing is , I think  our use of this space is more just to report on things as opposed to be creative and constructive and it would probably help to  have l sort of a cumulative effect of we have ideas and we come back and then the ideas are still in discussion , you know , project manager: -huh . marketing: as in other words this this room is sort of a centre point of creativity , whereas in reality as we've gone through this , it's not really the centre point of creativity , it's more just a project manager: Well d do you feel though that that you were able to have quite a lot of creative input into the thing ? marketing: d debating Yeah , yeah but that's just the thing is the quest in terms of the the first point there , the room , it feels as though the creativity goes on when we leave , and then we come here and then we kind of put out our ideas and then , you know . project manager: But I don't I don't think it means the room as in this room . I think it means like you know marketing: Oh , oh right right , oh right okay room for creativ project manager: Yeah . project manager: Well I dunno do you th I think it means  I think it means did you feel you were able to give creative input so marketing: Sorry . Yeah I th okay on th  yeah dif answering the question  in those terms I'd say that actually there's sort of a tease of creativity because we're asked to work through this , but actually the guidelines are fairly contrived in terms of  okay fashion trends , say fruit and vegetable colour scheme , project manager: We're told okay  think in terms of style and look and feel and technology , but build something for twelve and a half pounds , project manager: Okay . marketing: so actually the creativity was more more of like a  a f sort of a f formality then an actual industrial designer: You feel like you're caged within whatever y project manager: Okay . marketing: Yeah within the constraints industrial designer: It's like a balloon in a cage , it can only go so big and not hit the side . user interface:  I agree with his point it's  it is quite a lot of fun t to go and then you have sort of hit the end then go right , gotta cut everything out 'cause we don't have enough money . industrial designer: I think another point is that the meetings  are more brainstorming sessions than meetings , marketing: Yeah . industrial designer: Because for a brainstorming meeting you want a structure that allows you to allows ideas to get tossed ,  to be evaluated , and to be reviewed , and to get feedback and come back . industrial designer: And I guess that point about the room not being r very friendly to that , I think that's a very big thing , marketing: Yeah . industrial designer: and I think the fact that we're wearing these things restricts marketing: Yeah , sure . industrial designer: I feel it 'cause I wear m my glasses , right , and that but that irritates me right project manager: Yeah . industrial designer: it it it does actually you know affect how , w whether you feel comfortable to communicate . industrial designer: I feel like I'm hiding behind the equipment , rather than the equipment is helping me , and you know . project manager: So you think a more relaxed atmosphere would be more kind of conducive to creative thought or marketing: Right . industrial designer: Not not so much an atmosphere , the atmosphere is very relaxed , but the the gear project manager: Yeah , but actual environment ? industrial designer: yeah you know that creates boundaries to that  marketing:  .  what about leadership ? industrial designer: project manager: I don't know if that means like , if I did a good job or something . marketing: Yeah , well well  my sense on that is sort of what kind of guidance and direction , encouragement project manager: From like your personal coach person and stuff like that , do you think maybe ? marketing: Yeah from and you as well I think , just sort of acting as team leader .  my personal views on on leadership is that effective effective leadership sort of  gives people a certain room for freedom and delegation , but then to come back with something that they take great ownership and industrial designer: project manager: In in reality I think here the the different elements of leadership such as the the original b briefing and then the personal coach and the and then you know having having you with your the meeting agenda is actually quite a quite a quite a con confining framework to work within . And so it is leadership almost to the point of sort of disempowering the the the team member , so project manager: -huh , okay . marketing: But it's not bad leadership , it's just sort of s fairly strong , you know . It turns it turns the individual into more of like a  sort of a predetermined mechanism , as opposed to a sort of a free project manager: So you think maybe a little too controlling or industrial designer: marketing: Yeah , oh yeah , without without a doubt . industrial designer: I think structure is probably what you're saying that , each individual is structured to one particular task , and one parti rather than controlling . industrial designer: I don't think there's a sense of control 'cause all the decisions have been made in terms of a , like a consensus right , we go around and we think about it , marketing: industrial designer: It doesn't tell you , you know , some ways that you might wanna be a bit more creative in terms of the process you know , not the project manager: Okay . project manager: Okay ,  what about teamwork ? marketing:  did , you wanna comment Craig ? user interface: reckon that was a bit hard because we could only discuss things in the meeting . user interface: If we could just go up to somebody outside the meeting and have a quick talk with them , that would've been a lot easier . industrial designer: I think you tried to use the common share folder to to to to communicate , marketing: Fully agree . project manager: Okay ,  so  to s to to summarize the teamwork issue , saying that if we could communicate outside the meeting , you know just like quick questions , quick thoughts , whatever , it probably would be bit easier . industrial designer: I think the tools that they were given , the tool set that were given to us are fancy but they don't support collaboration , I think that's the word . marketing: Yeah , in it - , industrial designer: They don't support the team working together , you know , marketing: - , - , project manager: Oh right , okay . marketing: Yeah ,  sort of taking upon that idea , w the way I see this i is that it's  the the s the structure in which we've we've approached this whole task is quite contrary to the p principle of teamwork because the the tasks were d d sort of  divided , and then the work went on in isolation project manager:  . marketing: I I don't know what you guys did while you were together , maybe that was a bit different , industrial designer: We had Play-Doh fun . marketing: but  yeah , but  but actually if you if you imagine not entire the completely same task given to us but us said okay , first thing we have to do is come up with  let's say  a design concept , and we sit here together and do it , project manager: Yeah . To s to say okay go off and don't talk to each other , it's actually p sort of predisposes you to quite the contrary of teamwork . project manager: Right ,  anything else to say on teamwork at all ? industrial designer: No , not really . project manager: Okay ,  what about the you know how we used the whiteboard , the digital pens , the projector , stuff like that ?  did anybody think anything was like really useful , marketing: project manager: anything was pretty un f unsupportive ? marketing: I think the whiteboard , for me , is the kind of thing I would use all the time , but it's  not quite as useful as to us as it could have been , maybe just in the way that we we use it , in the sense that once we have an idea out there or while work was going on in between meetings , that could have been up on a board  you know as opposed to in like in text . I know that people who design cars and you know in aviation they quite often just have a simple like fibreglass prototype and it's completely you know  abs abstract from the final product , but they use it as a kind of a context to sort of walk around and puzzle and and point and discuss project manager: marketing: and and and in a way everybody's as we discuss things in the in theoretically and out of our notebooks , we're just we're actually just each of us discussing something that's in each of our own minds . marketing: like at one point I peeked across and looked at Craig's paper and I'm like , now I know what he's thinking 'cause I saw his book . marketing: But the b the b whiteboard could've actually been this kind of continuing  project manager: So do you think producing a prototype earlier in the process woulda been a good idea ? marketing: Think could be , yeah . industrial designer: I think  the the focus of it a lot was the PowerPoint as opposed to the to the whiteboard , project manager: Yeah . industrial designer: and I think that m  is also does you know hinder us and things I think . industrial designer: It will be cooler to have the whiteboard rather than the the PowerPoint , marketing: industrial designer: or maybe the whiteboard and the PowerPoint in the same place , marketing: Yeah . marketing: Yeah , because the PowerPoint was provided to us while we had time to prepare , whereas I can imagine if I'd been encouraged to use Paintbrush , for example , or whatever , I would've actually used it , project manager: Alright . marketing:  'ca you know , just 'cause that's sorta how we what we were set up to to use while we had our time . industrial designer: And a lot of the information on the PowerPoints , I don't think , you know , we needed to actually it could have , we could have gone through it verbally , project manager: Yeah . project manager: What about the digital pens , did you find them easy enough to use ? industrial designer: Yep clunky . project manager:  industrial designer: Having to tick it before you go off was a bit hindering as well , 'cause you're half way through a thought , and then you run out of paper and then you have to jump . project manager: I know , I think at the very start of today I like wrote a whole load of stuff , didn't click note on one , marketing: Yeah . project manager: then went back and wrote one tiny wee thing on the another page , but then did click note , and so I'm quite worried that I've just written over the top of it or something , marketing:  . industrial designer: But I think the pen is v is very intuitive , everybody knows how to use it , we don't have to worry . project manager: Yeah , marketing: - , industrial designer: So I think the pen's good . marketing: user interface: marketing: And o on the topic of the technology , it just occurred to me that we actually didn't need to move our computers because each computer has all of the files . marketing: It just occurred to me that they all industrial designer: Yeah we only needed one computer and marketing: We only actually needed one computer . marketing: If there had been a fifth , that coulda just been sitting there ready to go the whole time . industrial designer: And the computer may not  be conducive to a meeting because  you tend to look at your computer and wanna have the urge to check something , you know , marketing: Yeah . marketing: project manager: Do you think the computers just provide distraction in a meeting ? industrial designer: I think too many computers are just distracting . I know I I like to have things written down in front of me actually , like a lot of the stuff that was emailed to me I ended up you know like writing down there or something so I could look at it really quickly and not have the distraction of all of that , marketing: project manager:  what else  any wh I do I'm not really sure what they're looking for when they say new ideas found .  I don't know is user interface: Is this for the project or project manager: could you think of like anything else that would have been helpful today at all ? marketing: Well , the w main one for me is that  the process na in a natural f context would not have been interrupted by this necessity to discommunicate ourselves from each other . Yeah if we just had  marketing: So , that's kind of a new idea for me is like just sort of that idea , well you know it's kind of s hard to keep f working forward on a team a team based project when when you're told you must now work away from your team . Yeah I I dunno I think it was quite good that we had time limits on the meetings because they really could have run on and like my experience with meetings is that they really do , and you can spend a lot of time talking about marketing: Oh yeah . project manager: The only thing is though like when we had our meeting about the conceptual design , I thought there maybe another fifteen minutes would have been useful there but  yeah . project manager: I really thi i I think maybe if we'd like all been working in the one room , and they just said you know like every hour or something everybody make sure yo you know just have a have a short meeting and then just c marketing: project manager: just to have like something written down , just like you know a a milestone if you like  rather than having meetings , but marketing: What are you guys doing now ? user interface: Do we know what the other ones are ? industrial designer: marketing: I I don't know . project manager: So is that j is that just is that just a logo or does it do anything ? marketing: Logo . industrial designer: The the red is supposed to represent the whatever else you wanna print on the side of it . industrial designer: You can wear Homer , project manager: industrial designer: you can throw Homer when you're frustrated , doh . user interface: project manager: Oh no , that's cool , it's got I'm kind of industrial designer: It's clunky . project manager: I'm slightly gutted that we couldn't get plastic and rubber , I think that would have been nice . project manager: Play-Doh s marketing: industrial designer: It is useful and in in in in in in in  conceptualizing , in being creative . industrial designer: 'Cause like you say , it's something you can put your hands on and feel and touch and get a sense for . industrial designer: Like we were playing with the Play-Doh and the ideas came with the Play-Doh rather than with everything else . It's just , I'm just fiddling with the Play-Doh , and I'm going yeah yeah it's kinda cool . And some Play-Dohs are actually I think edible aren't they ? industrial designer: No , all Play-Doh is edible . project manager: Yeah like the stuff for user interface: I think they're all non-toxic 'cause it's aimed for like two-year-olds . industrial designer: It's just wheat , it's the stuff that your mom could make with preservatives and  project manager: Yeah  so to marketing: Wow ,  . project manager: wha what are your summarising words about Play-Doh ? industrial designer: It's helpful to the creative process . industrial designer:  it engages all your senses not just your sight , but your sense of feel your sense of touch . I think that that's very helpful because it it starts to pop up , project manager: Yeah . industrial designer: whereas on a piece of paper , on a computer , on a board ,  even with a three D_ graphic thing it still , it requires a lot of project manager: Yeah . marketing: Do we retreat to our , to continue our industrial designer: I think we could probably do it here as long as we don't collaborate . marketing: industrial designer: Can we turn off the microphones ? project manager: Yeah , yeah if the meeting's over then yeah I guess so
professor f: We can say the word " zero " all we want , phd g: I 'm doing some professor f: but just phd g: square brackets , coffee sipping , square brackets . phd d: There 's gonna be some zeros from this morning 's meeting because I noticed that professor f: u phd d: Barry , I think maybe you turned your mike off before the digits were Oh , was it during digits ? Oh , so it doesn't matter . phd b: So it 's not it 's not that bad if it 's at the end , but it 's in the beginning , it 's bad . grad a: Yeah , you wanna you wanna keep them on so you get good noise noise floors , through the whole meeting . Yeah I did have to run , but grad e: Is there any way to change that in the software ? grad a: Change what in the software ? grad e: Where like you just don't like if you if it starts catching zeros , like in the driver or something in the card , or somewhere in the hardware Where if you start seeing zeros on w across one channel , you just add some random , @ @ noise floor like a small noise floor . grad a:  certainly we could do that , but I don't think that 's a good idea . professor f: Well , I u I actually don't know what the default is anymore as to how we 're using the the front - end stuff but for for when we use the ICSI front - end , grad a: As an argument . professor f: but  , there is an there is an o an option in in RASTA , which , in when I first put it in , back in the days when I actually wrote things , I did actually put in a random bit or so that was in it , grad e: OK . professor f: but then I realized that putting in a random bit was equivalent to adding  adding flat spectrum , grad e: Right . Gee ! Here we all are ! grad a: so the only agenda items were Jane was Jane wanted to talk about some of the IBM transcription process . professor f: There 's an agenda ? grad a: I sort of condensed the three things you said into that . And then just I only have like , this afternoon and maybe tomorrow morning to get anything done before I go to Japan for ten days . So if there 's anything that n absolutely , desperately needs to be done , you should let me know now . professor f: Yeah , I guess you first you have to do the first one , grad a: Yeah . professor f: Oh they they had some extension that they announced or something ? phd g: Well yeah . Liz had sent them a note saying " could we please have another " I don't know , " three days " or something , and they said yes . phd d: And then she said " Did I say three ? grad a: Oh , phd d: I meant four . " grad a: that was the other thing  , phd g: But u grad a: Dave Gelbart sent me email , I think he sent it to you too , that  , there 's a special topic , section in si in Eurospeech on new , corp corpors corpora . grad e: Huh ! grad a: And  , professor f: Oh ! phd b: I got this mail from grad a: I s forwarded it to Jane as I thought being the most relevant person .  So , I thought it was highly relevant postdoc c: Yeah I 'm professor f: That 's grad a: have you did you look at the URL ? postdoc c: Yeah . phd b: Was this SmartKom message ? I think Christoph Draxler sent this , postdoc c: Yeah . grad a: but obviously I can't , really do , most of it , postdoc c: Yeah . For instance that Morgan  , accounted for fifty - six percent of the Robustness meetings in terms of number of words . postdoc c: because is it partly , eh , c correctly identified words ? Or is it or just overall volume ? phd g: No . I think it 's he 's he 's in all of them , postdoc c: Oh . phd g: we didn't mention Morgan by name grad a: and he talks a lot . professor f: Well we have now , but phd g: We we we something about grad a: Did you identify him as a senior member ? phd g: No , we as identify him as the person dominating the conversation . professor f:  I get these AARP things , but I 'm not se really senior yet , but phd g: Right professor f: phd g:  . professor f: but  , other than that delightful result , what was the rest of the paper about ? phd g: well it was about it had three sections professor f: You sent it to me but I haven't seen it yet .  , the one was that the just the the amount of overlap grad a: The good , the bad , and the ugly . phd g: s in terms of in terms of number of words and also we computed something called a " spurt " , which is essentially a stretch of speech with  , no pauses exceeding five hundred milliseconds .  , and we computed how many overlapped i  spurts there were and how many overlapped words there were .  , for four different corpora , the Meeting Recorder meetings , the Robustness meetings Switchboard and CallHome , and , found and sort of compared the numbers .  , and found that the , you know , as you might expect the Meeting Recorder meetings had the most overlap  , but next were Switchboard and CallHome , which both had roughly the same , almost identical in fact , and the Robustness meetings were had the least , so One sort of unexpected result there is that  two - party telephone conversations have about the same amount of overlap , grad a: I 'm surprised . phd g: sort of in gen you know order of magnitude - wise as ,  as face - to - face meetings with multiple grad a: I have I had better start changing all my slides ! phd g: Yeah . Also , I in the Levinson , the pragmatics book , in you know , textbook , there 's I found this great quote where he says you know you know , how people it talks about how  how how people are so good at turn taking , postdoc c:   phd g: and so they 're so good that generally , u the overlapped speech does not is less than five percent . grad e: Did he mean face like face - to - face ? Or ? phd g: Well , in real conversations , grad e:  . phd b: But postdoc c: Well , of course , no , it doesn't necessarily go against what he said , cuz he said " generally speaking " . phd b: And in f phd g: Well , he he made a claim grad a: Well phd g: Well grad a:  phd b: But professor f: Yeah , we we have pretty limited sample here . phd b: Five percent of time or five percent of what ? grad a: Yeah , I was gonna ask that too . phd b: Yeah , so postdoc c: It 's i it 's not against his conclusion , phd g: So but still but still u postdoc c: it just says that it 's a bi bell curve , and that , you have something that has a nice range , in your sampling . So there are slight There are differences in how you measure it , but still it 's You know , the difference between  between that number and what we have in meetings , which is more like , you know , close to in meetings like these ,  you know , close to twenty percent . professor f: But what was it like , say , in the Robustness meeting , for instance ? phd g: That grad a: But phd g: Robustness meeting ? It was about half of the r So , in terms of number of words , it 's like seventeen or eigh eighteen percent for the Meeting Recorder meetings and about half that for , the Robustness . professor f: Maybe ten percent ? grad a: But I don't know if that 's really a fair way of comparing between , multi - party , conversations and two - party conversations . phd b: Then then then you have to grad a:  that 's just something phd d: Yeah , I just wonder if you have to normalize by the numbers of speakers or something . phd b: Then Yeah , then normalize by by something like that , postdoc c: Yeah , that 's a good point . phd g: but this obvious thing to see if if there 's a dependence on the number of  participants . grad a: You have a lot of a lot of two - party , subsets within the meeting . phd g: And and and then and we also d computed this both with and without backchannels , postdoc c:   phd g: so you might think that backchannels have a special status because they 're essentially just grad a:  - huh . So , did we all said "  - huh " and nodded at the same time , phd g: R right . phd g: But , even if you take out all the backchannels so basically you treat backchannels l as nonspeech , as pauses , grad a:   You know , it goes down from maybe For Switchboard it goes down from I don't know f  I don't know f fourteen percent of the words to maybe  I don't know , eleven percent or something it 's it 's not a dramatic change , grad a:   phd g: so it 's Anyway , so it 's  That was that was one set of results , and then the second one was just basically the the stuff we had in the in the HLT paper on how overlaps effect the recognition performance .  , but mostly we added one one number , which was what if you  , basically score ignoring all So so the the conjecture from the HLT results was that most of the added recognition error is from insertions due to background speech . So , we scored all the recognition results , in such a way that the  grad a: Oh by the way , who 's on channel four ? You 're getting a lot of breath . phd g: OK , so so if you have the foreground speaker speaking here , and then there 's some background speech , may be overlapping it somehow , and this is the time bin that we used , then of course you 're gonna get insertion errors here and here . phd g: Right ? So we scored everything , and I must say the NIST scoring tools are pretty nice for this , where you just basically ignore everything outside of the , region that was deemed to be foreground speech . And where that was we had to use the t forced alignment , results from s for so That 's somewhat that 's somewhat subject to error , but still we we  , Don did some ha hand - checking and and we think that based on that , we think that the results are you know , valid , although of course , some error is gonna be in there . But basically what we found is after we take out these regions so we only score the regions that were certified as foreground speech , the recognition error went down to almost  , the level of the non - overlapped speech . So that means that even if you do have background speech , if you can somehow separate out or find where it is , the recognizer does a good job , grad a: That 's great . phd g: even though there is this back grad a: Yeah , I guess that doesn't surprise me , because , with the close - talking mikes , the the signal will be so much stronger .  , grad a: What what sort of normalization do you do ? phd g: so  , well , we just @ @ we do u you know , vit grad a:  in you recognizer , in the SRI recognizer . phd g: Well , we do  , VTL vocal tract length normalization , w and we  you know , we we  , make all the features have zero mean and unit variance . grad a: Over an entire utterance ? professor f: And grad a: Or windowed ? phd g: Over over the entire c over the entire channel . We just took the old So this is actually a sub - optimal way of doing it , grad a: Right . So the recognizer didn't have the benefit of knowing where the foreground speech a start professor f: Were you including the the lapel in this ? phd g: Yes . professor f: And did the did did the la did the the problems with the lapel go away also ? Or phd g: it Yeah . professor f: fray for for insertions ? phd g: It u not per  , not completely , but yes , professor f: Less so . So we have to  professor f: you still phd g: Well I should bring the should bring the table with results . professor f: I would presume that you still would have somewhat higher error with the lapel for insertions than phd g: Yes . professor f: Cuz again , looking forward to the non - close miked case , I think that we s still phd g:   And then , the third thing was , we looked at , what we call " interrupts " , although that 's that may be a misnomer , but basically we looked at cases where  , so we we used the punctuation from the original transcripts and we inferred the beginnings and ends of sentences . So , you know postdoc c: Di - did you use upper - lower case also , or not ? phd g:  postdoc c: U upper lower case or no ? phd g:  ? postdoc c: OK . phd g: No , we only used , you know ,  periods , question marks and exclamation . And we know that there 's th that 's not a very g  , we miss a lot of them , postdoc c: Yeah . That 's OK but phd g: but but it 's f i i postdoc c: Comma also or not ? phd g: No commas . And then we looked at locations where , if you have overlapping speech and someone else starts a sentence , you know , where do these where do other people start their turns not turns really , but you know , sentences , phd b: Ah . phd g:  So we only looked at cases where there was a foreground speaker and then at the to at the so the the foreground speaker started into their sentence and then someone else started later . phd b: Somewhere in between the start and the end ? phd g: OK ? And so what phd b: OK . phd g: Sorry ? phd b: Somewhere in between the start and the end of the foreground ? phd g: Yes . phd g: So , the the question was how can we what can we say about the places where the second or or actually , several second speakers ,  start their " interrupts " , as we call them . phd g: w And we looked at this in terms of  grad a: On T - closures , only . phd g: So so we had we had  u to for for the purposes of this analysis , we tagged the word sequences , and and we time - aligned them .  , and we considered it interrupt if it occurred in the middle of a word , we basically you know , considered that to be a interrupt as if it were at at the beginning of the word . phd g: And then we looked at the the locatio the , you know , the features that the tags because we had tagged these word strings , that that occurred right before these these  , interrupt locations . phd b: Tag by  phd g: And the tags we looked at are the spurt tag , which basically says or actually Sorry . So whether there was a pause essentially here , because spurts are a defined as being you know , five hundred milliseconds or longer pauses , and then we had things like discourse markers , backchannels , disfluencies .  , filled pauses So disfluen the D 's are for , the interruption points of a disfluency , so , where you hesitate , or where you start the repair there .  , repeated you know , repeated words is another of that kind of disfluencies and so forth . So we had both the beginnings and ends of these  so , the end of a filled pause and the end of a discourse marker . We just looked at the distribution of words , and so every " so yeah " , and " OK " , and "  - huh " were were the were deemed to be backchannels and " wow " and " so " and  " right " ,  were  Not " right " . But so , we sort of just based on the lexical  , identity of the words , we we tagged them as one of these things . So , and then we looked at the disti so we looked at the distribution of these different kinds of tags , overall  , and and and particularly at the interruption points . And  , we found that there is a marked difference so that for instance after so at the end after a discourse marker or after backchannel or after filled pause , you 're much more likely to be interrupted than before . So pauses are always an opportunity for So we have this little histogram which shows these distributions and , phd d: I wonder phd g: you know , it 's it 's it 's not No big surprises , but it is sort of interesting from grad a: It 's nice to actually measure it though . In other words  if you weren't going to pause you you will because you 're g being interrupted . professor f: But he yeah , he 's he 's right , y  maybe you weren't intending to pause at all , but You were intending to stop for fifty - seven milliseconds , phd g: Right . And and we so we wrote this and then , we found we were at six pages , and then we started cutting furiously phd b: Oops . phd g: and threw out half of the material again , and  played with the LaTeX stuff and grad a: Made the font smaller and the narrows longer . phd g: but we s we put Oh , I I grad a: Took out white space . phd g: you know the the gap between the two columns is like ten millimeters , phd b: Yeah . phd d: Wasn't there wasn't there some result , Andreas professor f: Yeah phd d: I I thought maybe Liz presented this at some conference a while ago about  , backchannels phd g:   Well phd d:  - i i do you rem phd g: y We didn't talk about , prosodic , properties at all , phd d: Right . But phd g: although that 's I I take it that 's something that  Don will will look at grad e: Yeah , we 're gonna be looking at that . postdoc c: Well , I didn't know about Liz 's finding on that , phd d: About postdoc c: but I know of another paper that talks about something phd d:  - huh . phd d: It made me think about a cool little device that could be built to  to handle those people that call you on the phone and just like to talk and talk and talk . And you just have this little detector that listens for these drops in pitch and gives them the backchannel . phd g: There 's actually  there 's this a former student of here from Berkeley , Nigel Nigel Ward . phd g: He did a system  , in he he lives in Japan now , and he did this backchanneling , automatic backchanneling system . phd g: It 's a very phd d: Oh ! phd g: So , exactly what you describe , phd d: Huh . And it 's apparently for Japa - in Japanese it 's really important that you backchannel . Actually for a lot of these people I think you could just sort of backchannel continuously and it would pretty much be fine . Where the barber who was afraid of scissors was playing a a tape of clipping sounds , and saying "  - huh " , " yeah " , " how about them sports teams ? " phd g: Anyway . So the paper 's on - line and y I I think I  I CC ' ed a message to Meeting Recorder with the URL so you can get it . So I I 'm actually about to send Brian Kingbury an email saying where he can find the the s the m the material he wanted for the s for the speech recognition experiment , so but I haven't sent it out yet because actually my desktop locked up , like I can't type anything .  b so if there 's any suggestions you have for that I was just gonna send him the phd d: Is it the same directory that you had suggested ? phd g: I made a directory . phd g: He does ? postdoc c: And he and he 's phd g: Yeah but but but he has to postdoc c: I 'd hafta add him to Meeting Recorder , I guess , phd g: he prefe he said he would prefer FTP postdoc c: but OK . phd g: and also , the other person that wants it There is one person at SRI who wants to look at the  , you know , the  the data we have so far , postdoc c: OK . So what I did is I  @ @ I made a n new directory after Chuck said that would c that was gonna be a good thing . Right ? The same the same as the mailing list , professor f: Yeah , phd g: and professor f: the No vowels .  , professor f: Yeah phd g: and then under there  actually Oh and this directory , is not readable . So , in other words , to access anything under there , you have to be told what the name is . phd g: So  , and the directory for this I call it I " ASR zero point one " because it 's sort of meant for recognition . professor f: So anyone who hears this meeting now knows the grad a: Beta ? phd g: And then then in there I have a file that lists all the other files , so that someone can get that file and then know the file names and therefore download them . If you don't know the file names you can't professor f: Is that a dash or a dot in there ? phd g:  you can grad a: Don't don't don't say . So all I all I was gonna do there was stick the the transcripts after we the way that we munged them for scoring , because that 's what he cares about , and  , and also and then the the waveforms that Don segmented .  , just basically tar them all up f  w for each meeting I tar them all into one tar file and G - zip them and stick them there . grad a: I  , put digits in my own home directory home FTP directory , phd g: And so . phd d: So we could point Mari to this also for her March O - one request ? phd g: OK . phd d: Or phd g: Oh ! phd d: You n Remember she was phd g: Oh she wanted that also ? phd d: Well she was saying that it would be nice if we had they had a Or was she talking Yeah . She was saying it would be nice if they had eh the same set , so that when they did experiments they could compare . grad e:  I phd g: But yeah , we can send I can CC Mari on this so that she knows phd d: Yeah . phd d: so I was gonna probably put it grad a: We can put it in the same place .  , so either we should regenerate the original versions , or  , we should just make a note of it . And so I but OK so but for the other meetings it 's the downsampled version that you have . Oh that 's th important to know , OK so we should probably  give them the non - downsampled versions . Alright , then I 'll hold off on that and I 'll wait for you  grad e: Probably by tomorrow phd g: gen grad e: I can I 'll send you an email . Yeah , definitely they should have the full bandwidth version , grad e: Yeah , because  I I think Liz decided to go ahead with the downsampled versions cuz we can There was no s like , r significant difference . grad e: It does take up less disk space , and apparently it did even better than the original than the original versions , phd g: Yeah . Good that Well , it 's a good thing that grad a: OK , I think we 're losing , Don and Andreas at three - thirty , right ? OK . professor f: So , that 's why it was good to have Andreas , say these things but So , we should probably talk about the IBM transcription process stuff that postdoc c: OK . So ,  you know that Adam created  , a b a script to generate the beep file ? professor f:  . But but you were gonna to use the originally transcribed file because I tightened the time bins and that 's also the one that they had already in trying to debug the first stage of this . And  , my understanding was that ,  I haven't I haven't listened to it yet , grad a:   postdoc c: but it sounded very good and and I understand that you guys were going to have a meeting today , before this meeting .  , just so that while I 'm gone , you can regenerate it if you decide to do it a different way . So  , Chuck and Thilo should , now more or less know how to generate the file postdoc c: Excellent . grad a: and , the other thing Chuck pointed out is that , since this one is hand - marked , there are discourse boundaries . So what what we 're probably gonna do is just write a script , that if two , chunks are very close to each other on the same channel we 'll just merge them . grad a: So , and that will get around the problem of , the , you know " one word beep , one word beep , one word beep , one word beep " . phd d: Yeah , in fact after our meeting  , this morning Thilo came in and said that  , there could be other differences between the  already transcribed meeting with the beeps in it and one that has just r been run through his process . phd d: So tomorrow , when we go to make the   , chunked file for IBM , we 're going to actually compare the two . So he 's gonna run his process on that same meeting , postdoc c: Great idea ! phd d: and then we 're gonna do the beep - ify on both , and listen to them and see if we notice any real differences . phd g: Beep - ify ! postdoc c: OK , now one thing that prevented us from apply you you from applying Exactly . Wel -  we just wanna if if there 're any major differences between doing it on the hand postdoc c:  - huh . phd g: So this training meeting ,  w un is that  some data where we have  very  , you know , accurate time marks ? for postdoc c: I went back and hand - marked the ba the bins , I ment I mentioned that last week . phd d: But the but there 's yeah , but there is this one issue with them in that there 're there are time boundaries in there that occur in the middle of speech . phd g: Because phd d: So Like when we went t to  When I was listening to the original file that Adam had , it 's like you you hear a word then you hear a beep and then you hear the continuation of what is the same sentence . grad a: It 's i phd d: So there are these chunks that look like  that have  grad a:  that 's not gonna be true of the foreground speaker . So you 'll you 'll have a chunk of , you know , channel A which starts at zero and ends at ten , and then the same channel starting at eleven , ending at fifteen , and then again , starting at sixteen , ending at twenty . Right , so that 's three chunks where actually we w can just make one chunk out of that which is A , zero , twenty . postdoc c: Yeah , I thought that was phd d: So if you were to use these , you have to be careful not to pull out these individual postdoc c: Yeah . phd g: Oh !  it Right ,  w  what I would I was interested in is having a se having time marks for the beginnings and ends of speech by each speaker . phd g: So  , it I don't care that you know , there 's actually abutting segments that we have to join together . phd g: But what we do care about is that the beginnings and ends  are actually close to the speech inside of that phd d: Yeah , I think Jane tightened these up by hand . phd g: OK , so what is the sort of how tight are they ? professor f: it looks much better . I just wanted to get it so tha So that if you have like " yeah " in a swimming in a big bin , then it 's phd g: No , no ! I don grad a: Let me make a note on yours . phd g: I it 's f That 's fine because we don't want to th that 's perfectly fine . You always want to have a little bit of pause or nonspeech around the speech , say for recognition purposes .  , but just just u w you know get an id I just wanted to have an idea of the of how much extra you allowed  so that I can interpret the numbers if I compared that with a forced alignment segmentation . postdoc c: but but my main goal was  , in these areas where you have a three - way overlap and one of the overlaps involves " yeah " , and it 's swimming in this huge bin , I wanted to get it so that it was clo more closely localized . But are we talking about , I don't know , a tenth of a second ? a ? You know ? How how much how much extra would you allow at most postdoc c: I I wanted to I wanted it to be able to l he be heard normally , phd g:   postdoc c: so that if you if you play back that bin and have it in the mode where it stops at the boundary , it sounds like a normal word . postdoc c: Now sometimes you know , it 's these are involved in places where there was no time . postdoc c:  some cases , there 're some people  , who who have very long segments of discourse where , you know , they 'll they 'll breath and then I put a break . postdoc c: But other than that , it 's really pretty continuous and this includes things like going from one sentence into the u one utterance into the next , one sentence into the next , w without really stopping .  i they , i you know in writing you have this two spaces and a big gap phd g:   postdoc c: But but  i some people are planning and , you know , a lot we always are planning what we 're going to say next . postdoc c: But  , in which case , the gap between these two complete syntactic units , which of course n spoken things are not always complete syntactically , but but it would be a shorter p shorter break than maybe you might like . postdoc c: But the goal there was to not have the text be so so crudely parsed in a time bin .  , because from a discourse m purpose it 's it 's more it 's more useful to be able to see and also you know , from a speech recognition purpose my impression is that if you have too long a unit , it 's it doesn't help you very much either , cuz of the memory . postdoc c: So , that means that the amount of time after something is variable depending partly on context , but my general goal when there was sufficient space , room , pause after it to have it be kind of a natural feeling gap . postdoc c: Which I c I don't know what it would be quantified as . You know , Wally Chafe says that  , in producing narratives , the spurts that people use tend to be , that the the what would be a pause might be something like two two seconds . postdoc c: I was interested that you chose  , you know  , the you know that you use cuz I think that 's a unit that would be more consistent with sociolinguistics . phd g: Well we chose  , you know , half a second because if if you go much larger , you have a y you know , your your statement about how much overlap there is becomes less , precise , postdoc c:   Yeah , I also used I think something around zero point five seconds for the speech - nonspeech detector phd g: and it 's also based  Liz suggested that value based on the distribution of pause times that you see in Switchboard and and other corpora . postdoc c: In any case , this this  , meeting that I hand I I hand - adjusted two of them I mentioned before , phd g:   postdoc c: and I sent I sent email , phd g: OK , postdoc c: so phd g: So so at some point we will try to fine - tune our forced alignment postdoc c: And I sent the path . phd g: maybe using those as references because you know , what you would do is you would play with different parameters . And to get an object You need an objective measure of how closely you can align the models to the actual speech . So , I will  phd b: Yeah and hopefully the new meetings which will start from the channelized version will will have better time boundaries and alignments . postdoc c: But I like this idea of  , for our purposes for the for the IBM preparation , n having these joined together , phd b: Yeah . phd b: And and in in the in the previous version where in the n which is used now , there , the backchannel would would be in - between there somewhere , so . Well , phd b: but postdoc c: that 's that 's right , but you know , thi this brings me to the other f stage of this which I discussed with you earlier today , phd b: Yeah . postdoc c: which is the second stage is  , w what to do in terms of the transcribers adjustment of these data .  , the tr so the idea initially was , we would get  , for the new meetings , so the e EDU meetings , that Thilo ha has now presegmented all of them for us , on a channel by channel basis . And  , so , I 've assigned I 've I 've assigned them to our transcribers and  , so far I 've discussed it with one , with  And I had a about an hour discussion with her about this yesterday , we went through  EDU - one , at some extent . And it occurred to me that  that basically what we have in this kind of a format is you could consider it as a staggered mixed file , we had some discussion over the weekend a about at at this other meeting that we were all a at  , about whether the tran the IBM transcribers should hear a single channel audio , or a mixed channel audio . And  , in in a way , by by having this this chunk and then the backchannel after it , it 's like a stagal staggered mixed channel . And  , it occurred to me in my discussion with her yesterday that  , the the the maximal gain , it 's from the IBM people , may be in long stretches of connected speech . So it 's basically a whole bunch of words which they can really do , because of the continuity within that person 's turn . So , what I 'm thinking , and it may be that not all meetings will be good for this , but but what I 'm thinking is that in the EDU meetings , they tend to be driven by a couple of dominant speakers . And , if the chunked files focused on the dominant speakers , then , when when it got s patched together when it comes back from IBM , we can add the backchannels . It seems to me that  , you know , the backchannels per - se wouldn't be so hard , but then there 's this question of the time @ @  , marking , and whether the beeps would be  y y y And I 'm not exactly sure how that how that would work with the with the backchannels . And , so  And certainly things that are intrusions of multiple words , taken out of context and displaced in time from where they occurred , that would be hard . So , m my thought is i I 'm having this transcriber go through the EDU - one meeting , and indicate a start time f for each dominant speaker , endpoi end time for each dominant speaker , and the idea that these units would be generated for the dominant speakers , and maybe not for the other channels . grad a: Yeah the only , disadvantage of that is , then it 's hard to use an automatic method to do that . The advantage is that it 's probably faster to do that than it is to use the automated method and correct it . I think I I think  , you know , the original plan was that the transcriber would adjust the t the boundaries , and all that for all the channels but , you know , that is so time - consuming , and since we have a bottleneck here , we want to get IBM things that are usable s as soon as possible , then this seemed to me it 'd be a way of gett to get them a flood of data , which would be useful when it comes back to us . postdoc c: Oh also , at the same time she when she goes through this , she 'll be  If there 's anything that was encoded as a pause , but really has something transcribable in it , then she 's going to  , make a mark w  , so you know , so that that bin would be marked as it as double dots and she 'll just add an S . And in the other in the other case , if it 's marked as speech , and really there 's nothing transcribable in it , then she 's going to put a s dash , and I 'll go through and it and  , you know , with a with a substitution command , get it so that it 's clear that those are the other category . But  , the transcribable events that  , I 'm considering in this , continue to be laugh , as well as speech , and cough and things like that , so I 'm not stripping out anything , just just you know , being very lenient in what 's considered speech . Yeah ? phd d: Jane ? In terms of the this new procedure you 're suggesting , u what is the grad a: It 's not that different . phd d: So I 'm a little confused , because how do we know where to put beeps ? Is it i d y is it postdoc c: Oh , OK . postdoc c: So what it what it what it involves is is really a s  , the original pr procedure , but only applied to  , a certain strategically chosen s aspect of the data . grad a: We pick the easy parts of the data basically , postdoc c: So grad a: and transcriber marks it by hand . grad a: And because phd d: But after we 've done Thilo 's thing . Oh , OK , postdoc c: Yes ! grad a: I didn't I didn't understand that . phd g: So ,  grad a: OK , leave the mikes on , and just put them on the table . postdoc c: We start with the presegmented version grad a: Let me mark you as no digits . phd b: You start with the presegmentation , r yeah ? postdoc c: Yeah . And then  , the transcriber , instead of going painstakingly through all the channels and moving the boundaries around , and deciding if it 's speech or not , but not transcribing anything . OK ? Instead of doing that , which was our original plan , the tra They focus on the dominant speaker phd d:   So what they do is they identify who 's the di dominant speaker , and when the speaker starts . postdoc c: So  , you 're still gonna phd b: And you just postdoc c: So we 're It 's based on your se presegmentation , that 's the basic thing . phd b: and you just use the s the segments of the dominant speaker then ? For for sending to to IBM or ? postdoc c: Yeah . phd d: So , now Jane , my question is when they 're all done adjusting the w time boundaries for the dominant speaker , have they then also erased the time boundaries for the other ones ? postdoc c:   postdoc c: That 's that 's why she 's notating the start and end points of the dominant speakers . So , on a you know , so i in EDU - one , i as far as I listened to it , you start off with a a s section by Jerry . So Jerry starts at minute so - and - so , and goes until minute so - and - so . And he starts at minute such - and - such , and goes on till minute so - and - so . And then meanwhile , she 's listening to both of these guys ' channels , determining if there 're any cases of misclassification of speech as nothing , and nothing as speech , phd d:   phd d: So she does the adjustments on those guys ? postdoc c: But you know , I wanted to say , his segmentation is so good , that  , the part that I listened to with her yesterday didn't need any adjustments of the bins . So this is not gonna be a major part of the process , at least least not in not on ones that that really phd d: So if you don't have to adjust the bins , why not just do what it for all the channels ? postdoc c:  -  ? phd d: Why not just throw all the channels to IBM ? postdoc c: Well there 's the question o of whether Well , OK . She i It 's a question of how much time we want our transcriber to invest here when she 's gonna have to invest that when it comes back from IBM anyway . postdoc c: So if it 's only inserting "  -  "s here and there , then , wouldn't that be something that would be just as efficient to do at this end , instead of having it go through I B M , then be patched together , then be double checked here . But But then we could just use the the output of the detector , and do the beeping on it , and send it to I B phd d: Without having her check anything . postdoc c: Well , I guess grad a: I think we just we just have to listen to it and see how good they are . phd b: For some meetings , I 'm I 'm sure it i n postdoc c: I 'm I 'm open to that , it was professor f: Yeah , if it 's working well , phd b: That 's And some on some meetings it 's good . professor f: that sounds like a good idea since as you say you have to do stuff with the other end anyway .  the detector , this phd d: Yeah ,  we have to fix it when it comes back anyhow . postdoc c: Now , you were saying that they they differ in how well they work depending on channel s sys systems and stuff . So we should perhaps just select meetings on which the speech - nonspeech detection works well , postdoc c: But EDU is great . phd b: and just use , those meetings to to to send to IBM and , do the other ones .  , my my my impression is that it 's better for meetings with fewer speakers , and it 's better for for meetings where nobody is breathing . phd d: So in fact this might suggest an alternative sort of a a c a hybrid between these two things . Yeah ? phd d: So the the one suggestion is you know we we run Thilo 's thing and then we have somebody go and adjust all the time boundaries phd b: Yeah . phd d: There 's a a another possibility if we find that there are some problems , phd b: Yeah . phd d: and that is if we go ahead and we just run his , and we generate the beeps file , then we have somebody listen beeps file . And erase phd d: And they listen to each section and say " yes , no " whether that section is phd b: Yeah . And it just You know , there 's a little interface which will for all the " yes " - es it then that will be the final beep file . postdoc c: That 's interesting ! Cuz that 's that 's directly related to the e end task .  it wouldn't be that much fun for a transcriber to sit there , hear it , beep , yes or no . I don't know , I I think I 'm I 'm really tending towards grad a: One and a half times real time . professor f: what 's the worst that happens ? Do the transcribers  as long as th on the other end they can say there 's there 's something conventions so that they say " huh ? " phd d: Yeah . professor f: i i It i phd d: We can just catch it at the catch everything at this side . phd d: Well maybe that 's the best way to go , postdoc c: How interesting ! phd d: just grad a:  it just depends on how postdoc c: Well EDU phd b: Yeah , grad a: Sorry , go ahead . phd b: u u u postdoc c: So I was gonna say , EDU - one is good enough , phd b: Yeah . postdoc c: maybe we could include it in this in this set of  , this stuff we send . phd b: Yeah there 's I I think there are some meetings where it would would It 's possible like this . grad a: Yeah I I think , we won't know until we generate a bunch of beep files automatically , listen to them and see how bad they are . phd d: We won't be able to s include it with this first thing , grad a: If postdoc c:  . phd d: because there 's a part of the process of the beep file which requires knowing the normalization coefficients . phd d: Right , except I don't think that the c the instructions for doing that was in that directory , right ? I I didn't see where you had gener grad a: No , but it 's easy enough to do . phd b: What professor f: But I but I have a phd b: Doing the gain ? It 's no problem . professor f: But but but I I I have another suggestion on that , which is , since , really what this is , is is is trying to in the large , send the right thing to them and there is gonna be this this post - processing step , why don't we check through a bunch of things by sampling it ? phd d:   professor f: Right ? In other words , rather than , saying we 're gonna listen to everything grad a: I didn't mean listen to everything , I meant , just see if they 're any good . So y you do a bunch of meetings , you listen to to a little bit here and there , phd d: Yeah . professor f: if it sounds like it 's almost always right and there 's not any big problem you send it to them . professor f: And , you know , then they 'll send us back what we w what what they send back to us , postdoc c: Oh , that 'd be great . professor f: and we 'll we 'll fix things up and some meetings will cost more time to fix up than others . grad a: And we should just double - check with Brian on a few simple conventions on how they should mark things . grad a: Yeah , cuz @ @  what I had originally said to Brian was well they 'll have to mark , when they can't distinguish between the foreground and background , professor f: Yeah . But if we send them without editing , then we 're also gonna hafta have m  , notations for words that are cut off , phd d:   phd d: And they may just guess at what those cut - off words are , postdoc c: Yeah . phd d: but w  we 're gonna adjust everything when we come back grad a: But what what we would like them to do is be conservative so that they should only write down the transcript if they 're sure . postdoc c: which professor f: i Can I maybe have have an order of it 's probably in your paper that I haven't looked at lately , but postdoc c: Certainty . professor f: an order of magnitude notion of of how on a good meeting , how often  , do you get segments that come in the middle of words and so forth , and  in a bad meeting how often ? phd b:  . postdoc c: Was is it in a in a what what is the t professor f: Well he 's saying , you know , that the the EDU meeting was a good good meeting , postdoc c: In a good meeting , what ? phd b: Yeah . professor f: right ? postdoc c: Oh I see , professor f: and so so so it was almost it was almost always doing the right thing . And then ,  in a bad meeting , or p some meetings where he said oh he 's had some problems , what does that mean ? postdoc c:  - huh . professor f: So  does one of the does it mean one percent and ten percent ? Or does it mean five percent and fifty percent ? postdoc c: OK . professor f:  phd b: So professor f: Or Maybe percentage isn't the right word , postdoc c: Just phd b: Yeah th professor f: but you know how many how many per minute , or You know . phd b: Yeah , the the problem is that , nnn , the numbers Ian gave in the paper is just  , some frame error rate . So that 's that 's not really What will be effective for for the transcribers , is They have to yeah , in in they have to insure that that 's a real s spurt or something . So the speech the amount of speech that is missed by the detector , for a good meeting , I th is around or under one percent , I would say . For yeah , but there can be more There 's There 's more amount speech  , more amount of Yeah well , the detector says there is speech , but there is none . Now what about in a meeting that you said we 've you 've had some more trouble with ? phd b: I can't really hhh , Tsk . That 's really I I did this on on four meetings and only five minutes of of every meet of of these meetings so , it 's not not that representative , but , it 's perhaps , Fff .  Yeah , it 's perhaps then it 's perhaps five percent of something , which s  the the frames speech frames which are which are missed , but  , I can't can't really tell . So I So i Sometime , we might wanna go back and look at it more in terms of how many times is there a spurt that 's that 's  , interrupted ? phd b: Yeah . professor f: Something like that ? postdoc c: The other problem is , that when it when it  d i on the breathy ones , where you get breathing , inti indicated as speech . professor f: And phd b: So postdoc c: And I guess we could just indicate to the transcribers not to encode that if they We could still do the beep file . professor f: Yeah again I I think that that is probably less of a problem because if you 're if there 's If if a if a word is is split , then they might have to listen to it a few times to really understand that they can't quite get it . professor f: Whereas if they listen to it and there 's don't hear any speech I think they 'd probably just listen to it once . professor f: So there 'd you 'd think there 'd be a a factor of three or four in in , cost function , postdoc c: OK . phd b: Yeah , so but I think that 's n that really doesn't happen very often that that that a word is cut in the middle or something . professor f: So so what you 're saying is that nearly always what happens when there 's a problem is that is that  , there 's some  ,  nonspeech that  that is b interpreted as speech . phd b: Yeah , it 's professor f: You know , if they they hear you know , a dog bark and they say what was the word , they you know , they phd b: Yeah , I als I professor f: Ruff ruff ! phd b: Yeah I also thought of there there are really some channels where it is almost  , only bre breathing in it . I 've got a a P - a method with loops into the cross - correlation with the PZM mike , and then to reject everything which which seems to be breath . phd b: So , I could run this on those breathy channels , and perhaps throw out grad a: That 's a good idea . But I think I th Again , I think that sort of that that would be good , phd b: Yeah . professor f: But I think none of this is stuff that really needs somebody doing these these  , explicit markings . Oh , I 'd be delighted with that , I I was very impressed with the with the result . professor f: Yeah , cuz the other thing that was concerning me about it was that it seemed kind of specialized to the EDU meeting , and and that then when you get a meeting like this or something , phd b: Yeah . professor f: and and you have a b a bunch of different dominant speakers postdoc c: Oh yeah , interesting . professor f: Whereas this sounds like a more general solution postdoc c: Oh yeah , I pr I much prefer this , professor f: is postdoc c: I was just trying to find a way Cuz I I don't think the staggered mixed channel is awfully good as a way of handling overlaps . phd d: And we can just , you know , get the meeting , process it , put the beeps file , send it off to IBM . I would phd d: Do what ? phd b: listen to it , and then grad a: Or at least sample it . professor f: make sure you don't send them three hours of " bzzz " or something . phd b: And there 's there 's one point which I  yeah , which which I r we covered when I when I r listened to one of the EDU meetings , professor f: Great . grad a:  - huh phd b: And i the speech - nonspeech detector just assigns randomly the speech to to one of the channels , so .  - I haven't - I didn't think of of s of this before , grad a: What can you do ? phd b: but what what shall we do about s things like this ? postdoc c: Well you were suggesting You suggested maybe just not sending that part of the meeting . postdoc c: But phd b: But , sometimes the the the laptop is in the background and some somebody is is talking , and , that 's really a little bit confusing , but grad a: It 's a little bit confusing . phd b: that 's that 's a second question , " what what will different transcribers do with with the laptop sound ? " postdoc c: Would you would professor f: What was the l what was the laptop sound ? postdoc c: Yeah , go ahead . postdoc c: Well , so  So my standard approach has been if it 's not someone close - miked , then , they don't end up on one of the close - miked channels . phd b: when thi when this is sent to to the I M - eh , I B M transcribers , I don't know if if they can tell that 's really postdoc c: Yeah , that 's right . grad a:  postdoc c: Well , they have a convention , in their own procedures , which is for a background sound . grad a: Right , but , in general I don't think we want them transcribing the background , cuz that would be too much work . grad a: Right ? For it because in the overlap sections , then they 'll phd d: Well I don't think Jane 's saying they 're gonna transcribe it , but they 'll just mark it as being there 's some background stuff there , grad a: But that 's gonna be all over the place . phd d: right ? grad a: How w how will they tell the difference between that sort of background and the dormal normal background of two people talking at once ? phd b: Yeah . postdoc c: Oh , I think I think it 'd be easy to to say " background laptop " . grad a: How would they know that ? phd d: But wait a minute , why would they treat them differently ? phd b: Yeah . postdoc c: Well because one of them grad a: Because otherwise it 's gonna be too much work for them to mark it . postdoc c: Oh , I s background laptop or , background LT wouldn't take any time . grad a: Sure , but how are they gonna tell bet the difference between that and two people just talking at the same time ? postdoc c: And phd b: Yeah . Acoustically , can't you tell ? phd b: It 's really good sound , so postdoc c: Oh is it ? Oh ! professor f: Well , isn't there a category something like  , " sounds for someone for whom there is no i close mike " ? phd b: Yeah that would be very important , grad a: But how do we d how do we do that for the I B M folks ? postdoc c: Yeah . grad a: How can they tell that ? phd d: Well we may just have to do it when it gets back here . grad a: And they 'll just mark it however they mark it , postdoc c: That sounds good . postdoc c: Well , as it comes back , we have a  when we can use the channelized interface for encoding it , then it 'll be easy for us to handle . postdoc c: But but if if out of context , they can't tell if it 's a channeled speak  , you know , a close - miked speaker or not , then that would be confusing to them . postdoc c: I don't know , I it doesn't I don't Either way would be fine with me , I don't really care . Do you think we should send the  that whole meeting to them and not worry about pre - processing it ? professor f: Yes ma ' postdoc c: Or  , what  is we we should leave the part with the audio in the  , beep file that we send to IBM for that one , or should we start after the that part of the meeting is over in what we send . professor f: Which part ? phd b: With postdoc c: So , the part where they 're using sounds from their from their laptops . phd b: with the laptop sound , or ? just postdoc c: w If we have speech from the laptop should we just  , excise that from what we send to IBM , or should we i give it to them and let them do with it what they can ? phd d: I think we should just it it 's gonna be too much work if we hafta worry about that I think . postdoc c: And give them freedom to to indicate if it 's just not workable . professor f: Cuz , I wouldn't don't think we would mind having that transcribed , if they did it . grad a: I think phd d: Yeah , e grad a: As I say , we 'll just have to listen to it and see how horrible it is . grad a:  -  , and and they 're very it 's very audible ? on the close - talking channels ? phd b: What what I would Yeah . postdoc c: OK , so we read the transcript number first , right ? grad a: Are we gonna do it altogether or separately ? phd b: So What time is it ? professor f: why don't we do it together , postdoc c: quarter to four . professor f: One , two , three , go ! postdoc c: It 's kind of interesting if there 're any more errors in these , than we had the first set . phd d: Do you guys plug your ears when you do it ? grad a: I do . professor f: I haven't been , phd d: How can you do that ? professor f: no . phd b: Perhaps there are lots of errors in it phd d: Gah ! grad a: Total concentration . Are you guys ready ? phd d: You hate to have your ears plugged ? professor f: Yeah
grad h: Yeah , so if  So if anyone hasn't signed the consent form , please do so . phd a: Now you won't be able to walk or ride your bike , huh ? professor d: OK . grad h: And  , shall I go ahead and do some digits ? professor d: we were gonna do that at the end , remember ? grad h: OK , whatever you want . Just just to be consistent , from here on in at least , that that we 'll do it at the end . professor d: OK  Well , it ju  it might be that someone here has to go , postdoc f: Testing , one , two , three . So ,  I had asked actually anybody who had any ideas for an agenda to send it to me and no one did . professor d: postdoc f: From last time I wanted to  The An iss  one topic from last time . professor d: Right , s OK , so one item for an agenda is  Jane has some   some research to talk about , research issues . professor d: I have a list of things that I think were done over the last three months I was supposed to send off ,  and ,  I I sent a note about it to  to Adam and Jane but I think I 'll just run through it also and see if someone thinks it 's inaccurate or  insufficient . phd a: A list that you have to send off to who ? professor d: to   , IBM .  , And , Anything else ? anyone wants to talk about ? phd a: What about the ,  your trip , yesterday ? professor d: No . professor d: Cuz that 's Cuz that was all all about the ,  I I I can chat with you about that off - line .  , And , Anything else ? Nothing else ?  , there 's a  , there is a a ,   telephone call tomorrow , which will be a conference call that some of us are involved in for  a possible proposal .  , we 'll talk we 'll talk about it next week if if something grad h: Do you want me to be there for that ? I noticed you C C ' ed me , but I wasn't actually a recipient . So it sounds like the the three main things that we have to talk about are ,  this list ,  Jane and Jane and Adam have some research items , and , other than that , anything , as usual , anything goes beyond that . OK , Jane , since since you were sort of cut off last time why don't we start with yours , make sure we get to it . postdoc f: OK , it 's it 's very eh it 's very brief ,  just let me just hand these out . So , if you 've looked at this you 've seen it before , so Basically ,  as you know ,  part of the encoding includes a mark that indicates an overlap . It 's not indicated with , tight precision , it 's just indicated that OK , so , It 's indicated to to so the people know what parts of sp which which stretches of speech were in the clear , versus being overlapped by others . So , I used this mark and ,  and , divided the I wrote a script which divides things into individual minutes , of which we ended up with forty five , and a little bit . postdoc f: And ,  What you can see is the number of overlaps and then to the right , whether they involve two speakers , three speakers , or more than three speakers . And ,  and , what I was looking for sp sp specifically was the question of whether they 're distributed evenly throughout or whether they 're bursts of them . And it looked to me as though  , you know y this is just eh eh , this would this is not statistically verified , but it did look to me as though there are bursts throughout , rather than being localized to a particular region . The part down there , where there 's the maximum number of of ,  overlaps is an area where we were discussing whether or not it would be useful to indi to s to code stress , sentence stress as possible indication of ,  information retrieval . professor d: What was what 's the the parenthesized stuff that says , like e the first one that says six overlaps and then two point eight ? postdoc f: Oh , th That 's the per cent . postdoc f: So , six is ,  two point eight percent of the total number of overlaps in the session . postdoc f: At the very end , this is when people were , you know , packing up to go basically , there 's this final stuff , I think we I don't remember where the digits fell . postdoc f: So , i it seems like it goes through bursts but ,  that 's kind of it . postdoc f: Now , Another question is is there are there individual differences in whether you 're likely to be overlapped with or to overlap with others . And , again I want to emphasize this is just one particular  one particular meeting , and also there 's been no statistical testing of it all , but I ,  I took the coding of the I , you know , my I had this script figure out ,  who was the first speaker , who was the second speaker involved in a two - person overlap , I didn't look at the ones involving three or more . And ,  this is how it breaks down in the individual cells of who tended to be overlapping most often with who who else , and if you look at the marginal totals , which is the ones on the right side and across the bottom , you get the totals for an individual . So ,  If you look at the bottom , those are the ,  numbers of overlaps in which  Adam was involved as the person doing the overlapping and if you look I 'm sorry , but you 're o alphabetical , that 's why I 'm choosing you And then if you look across the right , then that 's where he was the person who was the sp first speaker in the pair and got overlap overlapped with by somebody . postdoc f: And , then if you look down in the summary table , then you see that ,  th they 're differences in whether a person got overlapped with or overlapped by . phd e: Yeah Yeah postdoc f: Yes , very true very true grad h: Normalized to how much postdoc f: it would be good to normalize with respect to that . Now on the table I did take one step toward ,  away from the raw frequencies by putting ,  percentages . So that the percentage of time of the of the times that a person spoke , what percentage eh , w so . Of the times a person spoke and furthermore was involved in a two two - person overlap , what percentage of the time were they the overlapper and what percent of the time were they th the overlappee ? And there , it looks like you see some differences , that some people tend to be overlapped with more often than they 're overlapped , but , of course ,  i e this is just one meeting ,  there 's no statistical testing involved , and that would be required for a for a finding of any kind of scientific reliability . professor d: S so , i it would be statistically incorrect to conclude from this that Adam talked too much or something . grad h: No no actually , that would be actually statistically correct , professor d: Yeah , yeah . And I 'm you know , I 'm I don't see a point of singling people out , professor d: B I I I rather enjoyed it , but but this postdoc f: now , this is a case where obviously phd a: But the numbers speak for themselves . postdoc f: Well , you know , it 's like I 'm not I 'm not saying on the tape who did better or worse grad h: Yes , that 's right , so you don't nee OK . postdoc f: because I don't think that it 's I you know , and and th here 's a case where of course , human subjects people would say be sure that you anonymize the results , and and , so , might as well do this . grad h: Yeah , when this is what This is actually when Jane sent this email first , is what caused me to start thinking about anonymizing the data . postdoc f: And actually , you know , the point is not about an individual , it 's the point about tendencies toward you know , different styles , different speaker styles . postdoc f: And it would be , you know of course , there 's also the question of what type of overlap was this , and w what were they , and i and I and I know that I can distinguish at least three types and , probably more , the general cultural idea which w  , the conversation analysts originally started with in the seventies was that we have this strict model where politeness involves that you let the person finish th before you start talking , and and you know , w we know that an and they 've loosened up on that too s in the intervening time , that that that 's that 's viewed as being a culturally - relative thing , that you have the high - involvement style from the East Coast where people will overlap often as an indication of interest in what the other person is saying . phd b: Exactly ! postdoc f: Yeah , exactly ! phd e: Yeah postdoc f: Well , there you go . And and , you know , in contrast , so Deborah d and also Deborah Tannen 's thesis she talked about differences of these types , that they 're just different styles , and it 's  you you can't impose a model of there of the ideal being no overlaps , and you know , conversational analysts also agree with that , so it 's now , universally a ag agreed with . And and , als  , I can't say universally , but anyway , the people who used to say it was strict ,  now ,  don't .  they they also you know , ack acknowledge the influence of sub of subcultural norms and cross - cultural norms and things . So ,  Then it beco though so just just superficially to give  a couple ideas of the types of overlaps involved , I have at the bottom several that I noticed . So , there are backchannels , like what Adam just did now and , anticipating the end of a question and simply answering it earlier , and there are several of those in this in these data where phd b:   postdoc f: because we 're people who 've talked to each other ,  we know basically what the topic is , what the possibilities are and w and we 've spoken with each other so we know basically what the other person 's style is likely to be and so and t there are a number of places where someone just answered early . And places also which I thought were interesting , where two or more people gave exactly th the same answer in unison different words of course but you know , the basically , you know everyone 's saying " yes " or you know , or ev even more sp specific than that . So , the point is that ,  overlap 's not necessarily a bad thing and that it would be im i useful to subdivide these further and see if there are individual differences in styles with respect to the types involved . professor d: Well , of course th the biggest ,  result here , which is one we 've we 've talked about many times and isn't new to us , but which I think would be interesting to show someone who isn't familiar with this is just the sheer number of overlaps . professor d: That that Right ? that that ,  phd e: Yes , yes ! postdoc f: Oh , OK interesting . professor d: here 's a relatively short meeting , it 's a forty forty plus minute meeting , and not only were there two hundred and fifteen overlaps but ,  I think there 's one one minute there where there where where there wasn't any overlap ? grad h: Hundred ninety - seven . professor d: it 's  throughout this thing ? phd a: It 'd be interesting professor d: It 's You have postdoc f: Well , at the bottom , you have the bottom three . grad h: S n are postdoc f: So four four minutes all together with none none . phd a: But it w professor d: Oh , so the bottom three did have s stuff going on ? There was speech ? postdoc f: Yes ,  - huh . professor d: OK , so if the this phd a: It 'd be interesting to see what the total amount of time is in the overlaps , versus postdoc f: Yes , exactly and that 's that 's where Jose 's pro project comes in . phd e: Yeah , yeah , I h I have this that infor I have th that information now . professor d: Oh , about how much is it ? phd e: The the duration of eh of each of the overlaps . professor d: O oh , what 's what 's the what 's the average length ? phd e: M I I haven't averaged it now but ,  I I will ,  I will do the the study of the with the with the program with the  , the different ,  the , nnn , distribution of the duration of the overlaps . professor d: You don't know ? OK , you you don you don't have a feeling for roughly how much it is ? Yeah . phd e: The duration is ,  the variation the variation of the duration is  , very big on the dat phd a:   postdoc f: I suspect that it will also differ , depending on the type of overlap involved . postdoc f: So backchannels will be very brief phd e: Because , on your surface eh a bit of zone of overlapping with the duration eh , overlapped and another very very short . phd e: i probably it 's very difficult to to because the the overlap is ,  on is only the in the final " S " of the of the the fin the the end the end word of the ,  previous speaker with the the next word of the the new speaker . phd e: I considered that 's an overlap but it 's very short , it 's an " X " with a and the idea is probably , eh when eh when eh , we studied th th that zone , eh eh , we h we have eh eh confusion with eh eh noise . phd e: With eh that fricative sounds , but  I have new information but I have to to study . phd g: You split this by minute ,  so if an overlap straddles the boundary between two minutes , that counts towards both of those minutes .  , so le let 's think about the case where A starts speaking and then B overlaps with A , and then the minute boundary happens . And let 's say that after that minute boundary ,  B is still speaking , and A overlaps with B , that would be a new overlap . But otherwise  , let 's say B comes to the conclusion of of that turn without anyone overlapping with him or her , in which case there would be no overlap counted in that second minute . phd g: No , but suppose they both talk simultaneously both a a portion of it is in minute one and another portion of minute two . In that case ,  my c the coding that I was using since we haven't ,  incorporated Adam 's ,  coding of overlap yets , the coding of Yeah , " yets " is not a word .  since we haven't incorporated Adam 's method of handling overl overlaps yet  then that would have fallen through the cra cracks . It would be an underestimate of the number of overlaps because ,  I wou I wouldn't be able to pick it up from the way it was encoded so far . professor d: I I postdoc f: We just haven't done th the precise second to sec you know , second to second coding of when they occur . professor d: Let 's say that in in second fifty - seven of one minute , you start talking and I start talking and we ignore each other and keep on talking for six seconds . professor d: So we go over So we were we were talking over one another , and it 's just in each case , it 's just sort of one interval . Right ? postdoc f:  -  ? professor d: So ,  we talked over the minute boundary . professor d: OK , so that 's good , i I think , in the sense that I think Andreas meant the question , phd b: That 's that 's good , yeah , cuz the overall rate is phd c:  phd g: Yeah . postdoc f: I should also say I did a simplifying ,  count in that if A was speaking B overlapped with A and then A came back again and overlapped with B again , I I didn't count that as a three - person overlap , I counted that as a two - person overlap , and it was A being overlapped with by D . postdoc f: Because the idea was the first speaker had the floor and the second person started speaking and then the f the first person reasserted the floor kind of thing . postdoc f: These are simplifying assumptions , didn't happen very often , there may be like three overlaps affected that way in the whole thing . grad h: Cuz i i I find it interesting that there were a large number of overlaps and they were all two - speaker . grad h:  what I thought what I would have thought in is that when there were a large number of overlaps , it was because everyone was talking at once , but  apparently not . postdoc f: Yeah , there 's a lot of backchannel , a lot o a lot of grad h: This is really interesting data . phd b: I think what 's really interesting though , it is before d saying " yes , meetings have a lot of overlaps " is to actually find out how many more we have than two - party . postdoc f: I think so too , I think phd b: Cuz in two - party conversations , like Switchboard , there 's an awful lot too if you just look at backchannels , if you consider those overlaps ? it 's also ver it 's huge . It 's just that people haven't been looking at that because they 've been doing single - channel processing for speech recognition . professor d:  -  ? phd b: So , the question is , you know , how many more overlaps do you have of , say the two - person type , by adding more people . professor d: Well , but see , I find it interesting even if it wasn't any more , phd b: So . professor d: because since we were dealing with this full duplex sort of thing in Switchboard where it was just all separated out we just everything was just nice , phd b:  -  ? professor d: so that so the issue is in in a situation where th that 's phd b: Well , it 's not really " nice " . So if you were actually having ,  depends what you 're doing , if Right now we 're do we have individual mikes on the people in this meeting . So the question is , you know " are there really more overlaps happening than there would be in a two - person party " . professor d:  -  ? phd b: And and there well may be , but professor d: Let let m let me rephrase what I 'm saying cuz I don't think I 'm getting it across . What what I what I shouldn't use words like " nice " because maybe that 's too i too imprecise . But what  is that ,  in Switchboard , despite the many many other problems that we have , one problem that we 're not considering is overlap . And what we 're doing now is , aside from the many other differences in the task , we are considering overlap and one of the reasons that we 're considering it , you know , one of them not all of them , one of them is that w  at least , you know I 'm very interested in the scenario in which ,  both people talking are pretty much equally audible , and from a single microphone . And so , in that case , it does get mixed in , and it 's pretty hard to jus to just ignore it , to just do processing on one and not on the other . phd b: I I agree that it 's an issue here but it 's also an issue for Switchboard and if you think of meetings being recorded over the telephone , which I think , you know , this whole point of studying meetings isn't just to have people in a room but to also have meetings over different phone lines . phd b: Maybe far field mike people wouldn't be interested in that but all the dialogue issues still apply , professor d:   phd b: so if each of us was calling and having a meeting that way you kn you know like a conference call . And , just the question is , y you know , in Switchboard you would think that 's the simplest case of a meeting of more than one person , professor d:   phd b: and I 'm wondering how much more overlap of the types that that Jane described happen with more people present . So it may be that having three people is very different from having two people or it may not be . professor d: I think what I 'm All I 'm s really saying is that I don't think we were considering that in Switchboard . But  but but professor d: Were you ? grad h: Though it wasn't in the design . professor d: Were you were you were you were you measuring it ?  , w w were phd b: There there 's actually to tell you the truth , the reason why it 's hard to measure is because of so , from the point of view of studying dialogue , which Dan Jurafsky and Andreas and I had some projects on , you want to know the sequence of turns . phd b: So what happens is if you 're talking and I have a backchannel in the middle of your turn , and then you keep going what it looks like in a dialogue model is your turn and then my backchannel , professor d: Yeah . professor d: Yeah ? phd b: So , for things like language modeling or dialogue modeling it 's We know that that 's wrong in real time . professor d: Yeah ? phd b: But , because of the acoustic segmentations that were done and the fact that some of the acoustic data in Switchboard were missing , people couldn't study it , but that doesn't mean in the real world that people don't talk that way . phd b: Well , we 've als professor d: And and and , you you maybe wanted to look at it before but , for these various technical reasons in terms of how the data was you weren't . professor d: So that 's why it 's coming to us as new even though it may well be you know , if your if your hypothes The hypothesis you were offering eh phd b:  . professor d: Right ? if it 's the null poth hypothesis , and if actually you have as much overlap in a two - person , we don't know the answer to that . The reason we don't know the answer to is cuz it wasn't studied and it wasn't studied because it wasn't set up . Right ? phd b: Yeah , all I meant is that if you 're asking the question from the point of view of what 's different about a meeting , studying meetings of , say , more than two people versus what kinds of questions you could ask with a two - person meeting . professor d:  -  ? phd b: It 's important to distinguish that , you know , this project is getting a lot of overlap but other projects were too , but we just couldn't study them . Right ? phd b: Well , there is a high rate , professor d: We do kn we don't know the numbers . It 's but I don't know how high , in fact phd a: Well , here I have a question . professor d: See , i i le let me t  , my point was just if you wanted to say to somebody , " what have we learned about overlaps here ? " just never mind comparison with something else , phd b:   professor d: what we 've learned about is overlaps in this situation , is that the first the first - order thing I would say is that there 's a lot of them . professor d: In in the sense that i if you said if i i i phd b: Yeah , I I don't di I agree with that . professor d: In a way , I guess what I 'm comparing to is more the common sense notion of how how much people overlap .  you know the fact that when when when , Adam was looking for a stretch of of speech before , that didn't have any overlaps , and he w he was having such a hard time and now I look at this and I go , " well , I can see why he was having such a hard time " . All I 'm saying is that from the professor d: I 'm saying if I I 'm saying if I have this complicated thing in front of me , and we sh which , you know we 're gonna get much more sophisticated about when we get lots more data , But Then , if I was gonna describe to somebody what did you learn right here , about , you know , the the modest amount of data that was analyzed I 'd say , " Well , the first - order thing was there was a lot of overlaps " . In fact and it 's not just an overlap bunch of overlaps second - order thing is it 's not just a bunch of overlaps in one particular point , but that there 's overlaps ,  throughout the thing . phd b: I 'm just saying that it may the reason you get overlaps may or may not be due to sort of the number of people in the meeting . phd b: because some of the data say Switchboard , which isn't exactly the same kind of context ,  these are two people who don't know each other and so forth , But we should still be able to somehow say what what is the added contra contribution to sort of overlap time of each additional person , or something like that . professor d: Yeah , that would be good to know , phd a: What professor d: but w we postdoc f: OK , now . postdoc f: And the reason is because I think there 's a limit there 's an upper bound on how many you can have , simply from the standpoint of audibility . postdoc f: children don't adjust so well , if a truck goes rolling past , adults will well , depending , but mostly , adults will will will hold off to what to finish the end of the sentence till the till the noise is past . postdoc f: And I think we generally do monitor things like that , about whether we whether our utterance will be in the clear or not . postdoc f: And partly it 's related to rhythmic structure in conversation , so , you know , you you t Yeah , this is d also  , people tend to time their their their ,  when they come into the conversation based on the overall rhythmic , ambient thing . And and , just to finish this , that  That I think that there may be an upper bound on how many overlaps you can have , simply from the standpoint of audibility and how loud the other people are who are already in the fray . Now if it 's just backchannels , people may be doing that with less intention of being heard , just sort of spontaneously doing backchannels , in which case that those might there may be no upper bound on those . phd g: I I have a feeling that backchannels , which are the vast majority of overlaps in Switchboard , don't play as big a role here , because it 's very unnatural I think , to backchannel if in a multi - audience you know , in a multi - person audience . It 's interesting , so if you watch people are going like Right right , like this here , phd g: Right . professor d: u phd g: But but , it 's sort of odd if one person 's speaking and everybody 's listening , and it 's unusual to have everybody going "  - huh ,  - huh " professor d: Actually , I think I 've done it a fair number of times today . So so actually ,  That 's in part because the nodding , if you have visual contact , the nodding has the same function , but on the phone , in Switchboard you you that wouldn't work . Your mike is phd a: So , in the two - person conversations , when there 's backchannel , is there a great deal of overlap in the speech ? grad h: That is an earphone , so if you just put it so it 's on your ear . phd a: or Cuz my impression is sometimes it happens when there 's a pause , phd b: Yes . phd a: you know , like you you get a lot of backchannel , when somebody 's pausing phd b: Yes . phd b: Sorry , what were you saying ? phd a: It 's hard to do both , huh ?  no , when when when there 's backchannel , just I was just listening , and and when there 's two people talking and there 's backchannel it seems like ,  the backchannel happens when , you know , the pitch drops and the first person phd b: Oh . phd a: and a lot of times , the first person actually stops talking and then there 's a backchannel and then they start up again , and so I 'm wondering about h I just wonder how much overlap there is . Is there a lot ? phd b: I think there 's a lot of the kind that Jose was talking about , where  , this is called " precision timing " in conversation analysis , where they come in overlapping , but at a point where the information is mostly complete . So all you 're missing is some last syllables or something or the last word or some highly predictable words . phd a: But maybe a just a small overlap ? phd b: But you know , from information flow point of view it 's not an overlap in the predictable information . phd g: So so phd b: Well , that 's exactly , exactly why we wanted to study the precise timing of overlaps ins in  Switchboard , professor d: Yeah .  , to distinguish between , say , backchannels precision timing Sort of you know , benevolent overlaps , and and and w and and sort of ,  I don't know , hostile overlaps , where someone is trying to grab the floor from someone else . I ju I I think that in this meeting I really had the feeling that wasn't happening , that the hostile hostile type . phd g: I could imagine that as there 's a fair number of  cases where , and this is sort of , not really hostile , but sort of competitive , where one person is finishing something and you have , like , two or three people jumping trying to trying to trying to ,  grab the next turn . phd g: And so it 's not against the person who talks first because actually we 're all waiting for that person to finish . professor d: I have a feeling most of these things are that that are not a benevolent kind are are are ,   are are competitive as opposed to real really really hostile . phd a:  postdoc f: Well , there are various things , you you have the professor d:  a vote vote in Florida . phd e: Voting for professor d: o one thing I I wanted to or you can tell a good joke and then everybody 's laughing and you get a chance to g break in . You know , the other thing I was thinking was that ,  these all these interesting questions are , of course , pretty hard to answer with ,  u you know , a small amount of data . professor d: So ,  I wonder if what you 're saying suggests that we should make a conscious attempt to have ,  a a fair number of meetings with ,  a smaller number of people . Right ?  we most of our meetings are  , meetings currently with say five , six , seven , eight people Should we really try to have some two - person meetings , or some three - person meetings and re record them just to to to beef up the the statistics on that ? postdoc f: That 's a control . Well , it seems like there are two possibilities there ,  i it seems like if you have just two people it 's not really , y like a meeting , w is not as similar as the rest of the of the sample . It depends on what you 're after , of course , but It seems like that would be more a case of the control condition , compared to ,  an experimental condition , with more than two . professor d: Well , Liz was raising the question of of whether i it 's the number there 's a relationship between the number of people and the number of overlaps or type of overlaps there , postdoc f:   professor d: and ,  If you had two people meeting in this kind of circumstance then you 'd still have the visuals . professor d: Yeah , acoustic is fine , but phd g: If if the goal were to just look at overlap you would you could serve yourself save yourself a lot of time but not even transcri transcribe the words . phd b: Well , I was thinking you should be able to do this from the acoustics , on the close - talking mikes , grad h: Yep . grad h: Well , that 's the that was my my status report , phd b: right ? postdoc f: You 've been working on that .  , not as well as what  , you wouldn't be able to have any kind of typology , obviously , professor d: Yeah . professor d: But what what do you think about that ? Do you think that would be useful ? I 'm just thinking that as an action item of whether we should try to record some two - person meetings or something . phd b: I guess my my first comment was ,  only that  we should n not attribute overlaps only to meetings , but maybe that 's obvious , maybe everybody knew that , professor d: Yeah . phd b: but that in normal conversation with two people there 's an awful lot of the same kinds of overlap , and that it would be interesting to look at whether there are these kinds of constraints that Jane mentioned , that what maybe the additional people add to this competition that happens right after a turn , professor d:   phd b: you know , because now you can have five people trying to grab the turn , but pretty quickly there 're they back off and you go back to this sort of only one person at a time with one person interrupting at a time . To answer your question I it I don't think it 's crucial to have controls but I think it 's worth recording all the meetings we can . phd b: D I wouldn't not record a two - person meeting just because it only has two people . phd g: Could we Could we ,  we have have in the past and I think continue will continue to have a fair number of  phone conference calls . phd g: And , and as a to ,  as another c c comparison condition , we could  see what what what happens in terms of overlap , when you don't have visual contact . phd g: So ,  phd b: Can we actually record ? grad h: It just seems like that 's a very different thing than what we 're doing . phd g: Or , this is getting a little extravagant , we could put up some kind of blinds or something to to remove ,  visual contact . grad h: Barriers ! phd b: That 's what they did on Map Task , you know , this Map Task corpus ? They ran exactly the same pairs of people with and without visual cues and it 's quite interesting . professor d: Well , we we record this meeting so regularly it wouldn't be that  a little strange . That would professor d: Oh , th that was the other thing , weren't we gonna take a picture at the beginning of each of these meetings ? grad h: what I had thought we were gonna do is just take pictures of the whiteboards . phd a: Why why do we want to have a picture of the meeting ? phd b: Ee - you mean , transc no postdoc f: The because you get then the spatial relationship of the speakers . postdoc f: And that could be phd g: Well , you could do that by just noting on the enrollment sheet the the seat number . phd a: We can can't you figure it out from the mike number ? grad h: No . And even the jacks , I 'm sitting here and the jack is over in front of you . phd g: Yeah , but It 's it would be trivial grad h: It would be another task . grad h: So I 'm gonna put little labels on all the chairs with the seat number . grad h: But ,  phd g: Put them Like , put them on the table where they phd e: The chair Yeah . postdoc f: But you know , they the s the linguistic anthropologists would say it would be good to have a digital picture anyway , phd a: Just remembered a joke . Posture , and we could like , you know , block out the person 's face or whatever phd g: What people were wearing . postdoc f: but but , you know , these are important cues , phd g: Oh , Andreas was phd a: How big their heads are . postdoc f:  the the how a person is sitting is professor d: But if you just f But from one picture , I don't know that you really get that . postdoc f: It 'd be better than nothing , is is i Just from a single picture I think you can tell some aspects . professor d: Think so ? postdoc f:  I I could tell you  , if I if I 'm in certain meetings I notice that there are certain people who really do eh The body language is very  is very interesting in terms of the dominance aspect . postdoc f: But it 's just , you know , the the body phd a: He agreed . postdoc f: you know ? grad h: Of course , the where we sit at the table , I find is very interesting , that we do tend to cong to gravitate to the same place each time . I 'm sitting here so that I can run into the room if the hardware starts , you know , catching fire or something . phd g: Oh , no , you you just like to be in charge , that 's why you 're sitting grad h: I just want to be at the head of the table . grad h: Yeah , I 've been playing with , using the close - talking mike to do to try to figure out who 's speaking . So my first attempt was just using thresholding and filtering , that we talked about about two weeks ago , and so I played with that a little bit , and it works O K , except that it 's very sensitive to your choice of your filter width and your threshold . So if you fiddle around with it a little bit and you get good numbers you can actually do a pretty good job of segmenting when someone 's talking and when they 're not . But if you try to use the same paramenters on another speaker , it doesn't work anymore , even if you normalize it based on the absolute loudness . phd b: But does it work for that one speaker throughout the whole meeting ? grad h: It does work for the one speaker throughout the whole meeting . grad h: What do you mean ? phd a: wh what was the grad h: The algorithm was ,  take o every frame that 's over the threshold , and then median - filter it , and then look for runs . grad h: So there was a minimum run length , phd a: Every frame that 's over what threshold ? grad h: so that A threshold that you pick . grad h: So you take a each frame , and you compute the energy and if it 's over the threshold you set it to one , and if it 's under the threshold you set it to zero , so now you have a bit stream of zeros and ones .  well , actually I guess depends on what you mean by long , you know , tenth of a second sorts of numbers .  and that 's to average out you know , pitch , you know , the pitch contours , and things like that . postdoc f: OK grad h: And that works O K , if you fil if you tune the filter parameters , if you tune how long your median filter is and how high you 're looking for your thresholds . phd a: Did you ever try running the filter before you pick a threshold ? grad h: No . OK and then the other thing I did , was I took Javier 's speaker - change detector acoustic - change detector , and I implemented that with the close - talking mikes , and unfortunately that 's not working real well , and it looks like it 's the problem is he does it in two passes , the first pass is to find candidate places to do a break . And he does that using a neural net doing broad phone classification and he has the the ,  one of the phone classes is silence . And what looks like it 's happening is that the even on the close - talking mike the broad phone class classifier 's doing a really bad job . Does an do you remember , Morgan , was it Broadcast News ? professor d: I think so , yeah . grad h:  So , at any rate , my next attempt , which I 'm in the midst of and haven't quite finished yet was actually using the  , thresholding as the way of generating the candidates . Because one of the things that definitely happens is if you put the threshold low you get lots of breaks . But , like , it could be someone who isn't the person here , but the person over there or it can be the person breathing . But all of this is close - talking mike , so it 's ,  just just trying to get some ground truth . phd e: Only with eh  , but eh I I I think , eh when when , y I I saw the the the the speech from PDA and , eh close talker . phd e:  but eh I but eh I I  that eh eh in the in the mixed file you can find ,  zone with , eh great different , eh level of energy . not phd e:  I I think for , eh algorithm based on energy , eh , that  h mmm , more or less , eh , like eh eh , mmm , first sound energy detector . When y you the detect the the the first at at the end of of the detector of , ehm princ  . What is the the name in English ? the the , mmm , the de detector of , ehm of a word in the in the s in an isolated word in in the background That ,  grad h: I 'm I 'm not sure what you 're saying , can you try phd e:  that when when you use , eh eh any phd a: I think he 's saying the onset detector . phd e: I I think it 's probably to work well eh , because , eh you have eh , in the mixed files a great level of energy . And probably is not so easy when you use the the PDA , eh that Because the signal is , eh the in the e energy level . I think that ,  grad h: Ah , in the clo in the P D A , you mean ? phd e: In the PDA . I think the , nnn , the , nnn , that the idea of using a neural network to to get a broad class of phonetic , eh from , eh  a candidate from the the the speech signal . If you have , eh  , I 'm considering , only because Javier , eh only consider , eh like candidate , the , nnn , eh the silence , because it is the the only model , eh eh , he used that , eh eh nnn , to detect the the possibility of a a change between the between the speaker , grad h: Right . phd e:  another another research thing , different groups , eh working , eh on Broadcast News prefer to , eh to consider hypothesis eh between each phoneme . phd e: Because , I I I think it 's more realistic that ,  only consider the the the the silence between the speaker . phd e: I I found that the , eh silence in in many occasions in the in the speech file , but , eh when you have , eh eh , two speakers together without enough silence between between them , eh I think eh is better to use the acoustic change detector basically and I I I IX or , mmm , BIC criterion for consider all the frames in my opinion . Yeah , the you know , the reason that he ,  just used silence was not because he thought it was better , it was it was it was the place he was starting . professor d: and ,  e e you know , as as as is in your case , if you 're here for only a modest number of months you try to pick a realistic goal , phd e: Yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah . professor d: But his his goal was always to proceed from there to then allow broad category change also . But , eh do do you think that if you consider all the frames to apply the the , eh the BIC criterion to detect the the the different acoustic change , eh between speaker , without ,  with ,  silence or with overlapping , I think like like , eh eh a general , eh eh way of process the the acoustic change . phd e: An - and then , eh eh without considering the you you you ,  you can consider the energy like a another parameter in the in the feature vector , eh . And if , if you do that , eh eh , with a BIC  criterion for example , or with another kind of , eh of distance in a first step , and then you , eh you get the , eh the hypothesis to the this change acoustic , eh to po process grad h: Right . phd e: Because , eh eh , probably you you can find the the eh a small gap of silence between speaker with eh eh a ga mmm , small duration Less than , eh two hundred milliseconds for example professor d:   phd e: and apply another another algorithm , another approach like , eh eh detector of ene , eh detector of bass - tone energy to to consider that , eh that , eh zone . of s a small silence between speaker , or another algorithm to to process , eh the the segment between marks eh founded by the the the BIC criterion and applied for for each frame . phd e: I think is , eh nnn , it will be a an an a more general approach the if we compare with use , eh a neural net or another , eh speech recognizer with a broad class or or narrow class , because , in my opinion eh it 's in my opinion , eh if you if you change the condition of the speech , if you adjust to your algorithm with a mixed speech file and to , eh to , eh adapt the neural net , eh used by Javier with a mixed file . phd e:  With a m mixed file , grad h: With the what file ? phd a: " Mixed " . And and then you you , eh you try to to apply that , eh , eh , eh , speech recognizer to that signal , to the PDA , eh speech file , I I think you will have problems , because the the the the condition you you will need t t I I suppose that you will need to to to retrain it . professor d: u Look , I I think this is a One once It 's a I used to work , like , on voiced on voice silence detection , you know , and this is this kind of thing . professor d:  If you have somebody who has some experience with this sort of thing , and they work on it for a couple months , they can come up with something that gets most of the cases fairly easily . Then you say , " OK , I don't just wanna get most of the cases I want it to be really accurate . So , the p the problem is is that if you say , " Well I I have these other data over here , that I learn things from , either explicit training of neural nets or of Gaussian mixture models or whatever . Well , what does that mean ? That that means you set some thresholds somewhere or something , phd e: Yeah . professor d: right ? and and so where do you get your thresholds from ? phd e: Yeah . So you always have this problem , you 're going to new data  H how are you going to adapt whatever you can very quickly learn about the new data ?  , if it 's gonna be different from old data that you have ? And I think that 's a problem with this . grad h: Well , also what I 'm doing right now is not intended to be an acoustic change detector for far - field mikes . What I 'm doing is trying to use the close - talking mike and just use Can - and just generate candidate and just try to get a first pass at something that sort of works . phd g: Or grad h: and I haven't spent a lot of time on it and I 'm not intending to spend a lot of time on it . phd g: but ,  I can imagine  building a  model of speaker change detection that takes into account both the far - field and the  actually , not just the close - talking mike for that speaker , but actually for all of th for all of the speakers . phd g:  If you model the the effect that me speaking has on your microphone and everybody else 's microphone , as well as on that , and you build ,  basically I think you 'd you would build a an  that has as a state space all of the possible speaker combinations grad h: All the Yep . professor d: But Actually , Andreas may maybe maybe just something simpler but but along the lines of what you 're saying , grad h: Anyway . professor d: I was just realizing , I used to know this guy who used to build , mike mixers automatic mike mixers where , you know , t in order to able to turn up the gain , you know ,  as much as you can , you you you lower the gain on on the mikes of people who aren't talking , phd g: Mmm . professor d: right ? And then he had some sort of reasonable way of doing that , phd g:   professor d: but  , what if you were just looking at very simple measures like energy measures but you don't just compare it to some threshold overall but you compare it to the energy in the other microphones . grad h: I was thinking about doing that originally to find out who 's the loudest , and that person is certainly talking . I I have found that when when I I analyzed the the speech files from the , eh mike , eh from the eh close eh microphone , eh I found zones with a a different level of energy . because , eh eh depend on the position of the of the microph of the each speaker to , eh , to get more o or less energy i in the mixed sign in the signal . and then , if you consider energy to to detect overlapping in in , and you process the the in the the the speech file from the the the mixed signals . I I think it 's it 's difficult ,  only to en with energy to to consider that in that zone We have eh , eh , overlapping zone Eh , if you process only the the energy of the , of each frame . professor d: Well , it 's probably harder , but I I think what I was s nnn noting just when he when Andreas raised that , was that there 's other information to be gained from looking at all of the microphones and you may not need to look at very sophisticated things , phd e: Yeah . professor d: because if there 's if most of the overlaps you know , this doesn't cover , say , three , but if most of the overlaps , say , are two , if the distribution looks like there 's a couple high ones and and the rest of them are low , phd e: Yeah . professor d: by the way , I had an idea with while I was watching Chuck nodding at a lot of these things , is that we can all wear little bells on our heads , so that then you 'd know that phd e: Yeah . That 's cute ! phd b: I think that 'd be really interesting too , with blindfolds . The question is , like whether grad h: " what are you nodding about ? " phd b: Well , trying with and with and without , yeah . phd a: Actually , I saw a  a woman at the bus stop the other day who , was talking on her cell phone speaking Japanese , and was bowing . phd b: It 's very difficult if you try while you 're trying , say , to convince somebody on the phone it 's difficult not to move your hands . I still think we should try a a meeting or two with the blindfolds , at least of this meeting that we have lots of recordings of grad h:   phd b: maybe for part of the meeting , we don't have to do it the whole meeting . It 'll be too hard to make barriers , I was thinking because they have to go all the way professor d: W Yeah . postdoc f: Actually well also I I can say I made barr barriers for so that the stuff I was doing with Collin wha which just used ,  this kind of foam board . You can you can masking tape it together , these are you know , pretty l large partitions . phd b: But then we also have these mikes , is the other thing I was thinking , so we need a barrier that doesn't disturb the sound , postdoc f: It 's true , it would disturb the ,  the the long - range grad h: The acoustics . phd b: it sounds weird but but you know it 's it 's cheap and ,  Be interesting to have the camera going . grad h: Yeah , that 's right , we didn't tell them we would be blindfolding . professor d: That 's postdoc f: " Do you mind being blindfolded while you 're interviewed ? " professor d: that 's that 's that 's the one that we videotape .  I did have this other agenda item which is ,  @ @ it 's  a list which I sent to  a couple folks , but  I wanted to get broader input on it , So this is the things that I think we did in the last three months obviously not everything we did but but sort of highlights that I can can tell s some outside person , you know , what what were you actually working on .  in no particular order  , one , ten more hours of meeting r meetings recorded , something like that , you know from from ,  three months ago .  , pilot data put together and sent to IBM for transcription ,  next batch of recorded data put together on the CD - ROMs for shipment to IBM , grad h: Hasn't been sent yet , but It 's getting ready .  human subjects approval on campus ,  and release forms worked out so the meeting participants have a chance to request audio pixelization of selected parts of the spee their speech .  preliminary analysis of overlaps in the pilot data we have transcribed , and exploratory analysis of long - distance inferences for topic coherence , that was I was wasn't sure if those were the right way that was the right way to describe that because of that little exercise that that you and and Lokendra did . postdoc f: What was that called ? professor d: I well , I I 'm probably saying this wrong , but what I said was exploratory analysis of long - distance inferences for topic coherence .  so ,  I a lot of that was from , you know , what what what you two were doing so I I sent it to you , and you know , please mail me , you know , the corrections or suggestions for changing grad h:   professor d: I I don't want to make this twice it 's length but but you know , just im improve it . professor d: " Bunch of stuff for s " OK , maybe maybe send me a sentence that 's a little thought through about that . grad h: So , OK , I 'll send you a sentence that doesn't just say " a bunch of " ? professor d: " Bunch of stuff " , yeah , " stuff " is probably bad too , grad h: Yep .  and and you know , I sort of threw in what you did with what Jane did on in under the ,   preliminary analysis of overlaps .   Thilo , can you tell us about all the work you 've done on this project in the last ,  last three months ? phd e: Yeah . Wh - what is " audio pixelization " ? professor d: audio pix wh he did it , so why don't you explain it quickly ? grad h: It 's just ,  beeping out parts that you don't want included in the meeting so , you know you can say things like , " Well , this should probably not be on the record , but beep " phd c: OK , OK . We we we spent a a a fair amount of time early on just talk dealing with this issue about op w e e we realized , " well , people are speaking in an impromptu way and they might say something that would embarrass them or others later " , and , how do you get around that phd c:  OK . professor d: so in the consent form it says , well you we will look at the transcripts later and if there 's something that you 're unhappy with , yeah . professor d: But you don't want to just totally excise it because   , well you have to be careful about excising it , how how you excise it keeping the timing right and so forth so that at the moment tho th the idea we 're running with is is h putting the beep over it . grad h: if someone is listening to it , there 's no mistake that it 's been beeped out , phd c: Yeah . You can you know , you could make a m as long as you keep using the same beep , people could make a model of that beep , postdoc f:  . And I use it 's it 's ,  it 's an A below middle C beep , phd b: I think the beep is a really good idea . phd b: Also phd a: Yeah , it 's more obvious that there was something there than if there 's just silence . professor d: Yeah , that  , he 's he 's removing the old thing phd e: Yeah professor d: and and and grad h: Yep . But  if you just replaced it with silence , it 's not clear whether that 's really silence or grad h: Yeah , it 's not phd c: Yeah . postdoc f: Well , the other thing that you know ,  the the alternative might be to s grad h: Yeah . grad h: Sorry , and then the DARPA meeting I just excised completely , postdoc f: Yeah . professor d: Alright , so ,  I think we should , go on to the digits ? postdoc f: I have one concept a t I I want to say , which is that I think it 's nice that you 're preserving the time relations , grad h: OK . postdoc f: s so you 're you 're not just cutting you 're not doing scissor snips . phd b: So I guess if there 's an overlap , like , if I 'm saying something that 's bleepable and somebody else overlaps during it they also get bleeped , too ? professor d: Yeah .  I d I did before we do the digits , I did also wanna remind people ,  please do send me , you know ,  thoughts for an agenda , grad h: Agenda ? professor d: yeah that that would be that 'd be good . professor d: Eh So that , people 's ideas don't get grad h: Thursday crept up on me this week . professor d: yeah , well it does creep up , doesn't it ? phd b: And , I wanted to say , I think this is really interesting analysis . grad h: I was gonna say " can you do that for the other meetings , phd b: It 's neat . phd a: Actually actually I I thought that 's what you were giving us was another meeting and I was like , " Oh , OK ! " phd b: Does it take postdoc f: Thank you . I have the script now , so , it can work off the ,  other thing , grad h: It 's As soon as we get labels , yep . phd a: But it has to be hand - labeled first ? postdoc f: but  , well , yeah . postdoc f: But I I just worked off of my phd b: It 's really neat . I think what I what this has , caused me so this discussion caused me to wanna subdivide these further . I 'm gonna take a look at the ,  backchannels , how much we have anal I hope to have that for next time . grad h: Yeah , my my algorithm worked great actually on these , but when you wear it like that or with the  , lapel or if you have it very far from your face , that 's when it starts failing . phd b: Well , I can wear it ,  if you grad h: It doesn't matter . grad h: right ? I I don't want to change the way we do the meeting . grad h: It 's  so , it was just a comment on the software , not a comment on prescriptions on how you wear microphones . grad h: Get the bolts , " whh whh " postdoc f: Let 's do it . postdoc f: Do you want us to put a mark on the bottom of these when they 've actually been read , or do you just i i the only one that wasn't read is is known , so we don't do it
grad d:  grad e: What does your thing say on the back ? grad d: Testing . grad f: Yeah , well , I g guess it 's coming up then , or grad d: Cuz it 's That starts counting from zero and these start counting from one . grad d: Your mike number is what we 're t grad e: Look at the back . grad d: Ho ! grad b: So grad d: I 've bested you again , Nancy . Damn ! Foiled again ! grad d: So is Keith showing up ? He 's talking with George right now .  , is he gonna get a rip  rip himself away from from that ? grad b: He 'll probably come later . grad d: Oh , then it 's just gonna be the five of us ? professor c: Yeah . grad e: Well , he he was very affirmative in his way of saying he will be here at four . So , Eva just reported she 's really happy about the CBT 's being in the same order in the XML as in the  be Java declaration format grad f: Yeah . The e grad e: so you don't have to do too much in the style sheet transversion . grad e: The  , Java the embedded Bayes wants to take input  , a Bayes - net in in some Java notation and Eva is using the Xalan style sheet processor to convert the XML that 's output by the Java Bayes for the into the , E Bayes input . grad f: Actually , maybe I could try , like , emailing the guy and see if he has any something already . grad f: That 'd be weird , that he has both the Java Bayes and the embedded Bayes in grad d: But that 's some sort of conversion program ? grad f: Yeah . grad e: And , well pretty mu pretty much on t on the top of my list , I would have asked Keith how the " where is X ? " hand parse is standing . grad d: So the trees for the XML trees for the for the gene for the synthesizer are written . Just gonna be you know professor c: Oh ! You were gonna send me a note about hiring grad e: Yes . grad e: OK , so natural language generation produces not a just a surface string that is fed into a text - to - speech but , a surface string with a syntax tree that 's fed into a concept - to - speech . grad e: Now and this concept - to - speech module has certain rules on how if you get the following syntactic structure , how to map this onto prosodic rules . grad e: And Fey has foolheartedly agreed to rewrite  , the German concept  syntax - to - prosody rules grad b: I didn't know she spoke German . And  therefore the ,  if it 's OK that we give her a couple of more hours per week , then she 'll do that . grad d: What language is that written i Is that that Scheme thing that you showed me ? grad e: Yeah . grad d: She knows how to program in Scheme ? I hope ? grad e: No , I My guess is I I asked for a commented version of that file ? If we get that , then it 's doable , even without getting into it , even though the Scheme li  , stuff is really well documented in the Festival . grad d: Well , I guess if you 're not used to functional programming , Scheme can be completely incomprehensible . But anyway , send me the note and then I 'll - I 'll check with , Morgan on the money . Oh , so this was You know , on the generation thing ,  if sh y she 's really going to do that , then we should be able to get prosody as well . grad d: Are we gonna Can we change the voice of the of the thing , because right now the voice sounds like a murderer . grad b: Wh - Which one ? grad d: The the little Smarticus Smarticus sounds like a murderer . grad e: It is  , we have the choice between the , usual Festival voices , which I already told the SmartKom people we aren't gonna use because they 're really bad . grad b: Festival ? professor c: It 's the name of some program , grad b: Oh , oh . grad e: OGI has , crafted a couple of diphone type voices that are really nice and we 're going to use that . grad d: Does OGI stand for ? Original German Institute ? professor c: Orego grad b: So . grad b: Oregon Graduate Insti professor c: Oregon @ @ Graduate Institute grad d: Oh . professor c: It turns out there 's the long - standing links with these guys in the speech group . professor c: In fact , there 's this guy who 's basically got a joint appointment , Hynek Hermansky . And it 's probably also absolutely uninteresting for all of you to ,  learn that as of twenty minutes ago , David and I , per accident ,  managed to get the whole SmartKom system running on the  , ICSI Linux machines with the ICSI NT machines thereby increasing the number of running SmartKom systems in this house from one on my laptop to three . grad e: I suggested to try something that was really kind of even though against better knowledge shouldn't have worked , but it worked . grad b: Will it work again , grad e: Maybe maybe maybe a bit for the AI i intuition thing . It - it 's just like why why the generation ma the presentation manager is now working ? grad a:  ! This is something you ha you get used to as a programmer , right ? grad e: Which grad a: You know , and it 's cool , it works out that way . So , the the people at Saarbruecken and I decided not to touch it ever again . grad a: What what thing is this ? grad e: Where is X ? grad a: OK . grad e: Oh , but by  , we can ask , did you get to read all four hundred words ? professor c: I did . That professor c: You know , i Yeah , it grad d: Each paragraph is good , though . grad b: Yeah , I didn't know about it until Robert told me , like ,  professor c: Yeah , I I ra I ran across it in I don't even know where , you know some just some weird place . And , yeah , I I 'm surprised I didn't know about it grad b: Y yeah . I was like , why didn't Dan tell me ? professor c: since we know all the invited speakers , an grad a: Right . Before we get started on this st so I also had a nice email correspondence with Daphne Kohler , who said yes indeed she would love to work with us on the , you know , using these structured belief - nets and stuff but starting in August , that she 's also got a new student working on this and that we should get in touch with them again in August and then we 'll figure out a way for you  you to get seriously connected with ,  their group . So ,  And it looks to me like we 're now at a good point to do something start working on something really hard . grad a: Oh ! professor c: w Which is mental spaces and  and - or grad a:  ! grad b: It 's hard . But the other part of it is the way they connect to these , probabilistic relational models . So there 's all the problems that the linguists know about , about mental spaces , and the cognitive linguists know about , but then there 's this problem of the belief - net people have only done a moderately good job of dealing with temporal belief - nets . professor c: So there 's a term " dynamic belief - net " , doesn't mean that . But one of the things I w would like to do over the next , month , it may take more , is to st understand to what extent we can not only figure out the constructions for them for multiple worlds and  sort of what the formalism will look like and where the slots and fillers will be , but also what that would translate into in terms of belief - net and the inferences . So the story is that if you have these probabilistic relational models , they 're set up , in principle , so that you can make new instances and instances connect to each other , and all that sort of stuff , so it should be feasible to set them up in such a way that if you 've got the past tense and the present tense and each of those is a separate  , belief structure that they do their inferences with just the couplings that are appropriate . But that 's g that 's , as far as I can tell , it 's it 's putting together two real hard problems . One is the linguistic part of what are the couplings and and when you have a certain , construction , that implies certain couplings and other couplings , you know , between let 's say between the past and the present , or any other one of these things and then we have this inference problem of exactly technically how does the belief - net work if it 's got  , let 's say one in in , you know , different tenses or my beliefs and your beliefs , or any of these other ones of of multiple models . So  you know , in the long run we need to solve both of those and my suggestion is that we start digging into them both , in a way we that , you know , th hopefully turns out to be consistent , so that the  . But anyway , so that 's ,  grad a: Oh yeah , like  , I solved the the problem of  we were talking about how do you various issues of how come a plural noun gets to quote " count as a noun phrase " , you know , occur as an argument of a higher construction , but a bare singular stem doesn't get to act that way . grad a: and it would take a really long time to explain it now , but I 'm about to write it up this evening . I solved that at the same time as " how do we keep adjectives from floating to the left of determiners and how do we keep all of that from floating outside the noun phrase " to get something like " I the kicked dog " . No , I know , I th I I think that is gonna be sort of the key to this wh to th the big project of the summer of of getting the constructions right is that people do manage to do this so there probably are some , relatively clean rules , they 're just not context - free trees . professor c: And if we if the formalism is is good , then we should be able to have , you know , sort of moderate scale thing . And that by the way is is , Keith , what I encouraged George to be talking with you about . professor c: The p And Oh , another thing ,  there was this ,  thing that Nancy agreed to in a in a weak moment this morning that grad a:  ! grad b: I was really strong . professor c: Anyway , that we were that we 're gonna try to get a  , first cut at the revised formalism by the end of next week . professor c: just trying to write up essentially what what you guys have worked out so that everybody has something to look at . We 've talked about it , but only the innermost inner group currently , grad a:   grad a: There 's The group as a whole knows but no individual member kno professor c: Well that that yeah th there 's one of the advantages of a document , right ? , grad a: Yeah . Anyway , so , with a little luck  l let 's , let 's have that as a goal anyway . grad a: So , what was the date there ? professor c: And grad a: Monday or ? It 's a Friday . grad b: But , but but the two of us will probably talk to you at well before th grad a: I thought you said beginning of n Yeah . Anyway , w let 's talk separately about how t grad a: Yeah , I have a busy weekend but after that Yeah , gung - ho . grad a: Great , professor c: Now if it turns out that that effort leads us into some big hole that 's fine . There 's a really hard problem we haven't solved yet that , that 's just fine . grad a: But at at least sort of try and work out what the state of the art is right now . professor c: Right , t t if to the extent that we have it , let 's write it grad a: OK . professor c: and to the extent we don't , let 's find out what we need to do . professor c: So ,  grad e: Can we ? Is it worth thinking of an example out of our tourism thing domain , that involves a a a decent mental space shift or setting up professor c: I think it is , but  but I interrupted before Keith got to tell us what happened with " where is the Powder - Tower ? " or whatever grad b: Right .  , what was supposed to happen ? I 've sort of been actually caught up in some other ones , so , you know , I don't have a write - up of or I haven't elaborated on the ideas that we were already talking about which were grad e: yeah . I think I think we already came to the conclusion that we have two alternative paths that we two alternative ways of representing it . grad e:  grad a: The question of whether the polysemy is sort of like in the construction or pragmatic . grad a: so d ' you Is it clear what we 're talking about here ? grad b: I agree . grad a: The question is whether the construction is semantic or like ambiguous between asking for location and asking for path . grad e: It 's grad a:  or or whether the construction semantically , is clearly only asking for location grad e: Should we have a a a grad b:  grad a: but pragmatically that 's construed as meaning " tell me how to get there " . grad e: So assume these are two , nodes we can observe in the Bayes - net . grad e: So these are either true or false and it 's also just true or false . If we encounter a phrase such as " where is X ? " , should that set this to true and this to true , and the Bayes - net figures out which under the c situation in general is more likely ?  , or should it just activate this , have this be false , and the Bayes - net figures out whether this actually now means ? professor c:  w that 's a s grad b: Slightly different . professor c: So I a I I th I agree with you that , it 's a disaster to try to make separate constructions for every  , pragmatic reading , grad a:   professor c: there there 's some that grad b: Or have every construction list all the possible pragmatic implications of the same one . But , you know , c  almost certainly " can you pass the salt " is a construction worth noting that there is this th this this this  grad a: Yeah . Is it is it like that or is it just sort of obvious from world knowledge that no one you wouldn't want to know the location without wanting to know how to get there or whatever . grad e: One Or in some cases , it 's it 's quite definitely professor c: Yeah . Well the question is basically , is this conventional or conversational implicature ? professor c: Exactly . professor c: And I guess , see , the more important thing at this stage is that we should be able to know how we would handle it in ei f in the short run it 's more important to know how we would treat technically what we would do if we decided A and what we would do if we decided B , than it is t to decide A or B r right now . professor c: So I guess In the short run , let 's let 's be real clear on h what the two alternatives would be . grad e: And then the we had another idea floating around  , which we wanted to , get your input on , and that concerns the But the nice thing is w we would have a person that would like to work on it , and that 's Ir - Irina Gurevich from EML who is going to be visiting us , the week before , August and a little bit into August .  , and one of the reas one of the those ideas was , so , back to the old Johno observation that if y if you have a dialogue history and it said the word " admission fee " was  , mentioned  , it 's more likely that the person actually wants to enter than just take a picture of it from the outside . Now what could imagine to , you know , have a list for each construction of things that one should look up in the discourse history , yeah ? That 's the really stupid way . Then there is the really clever way that was suggested by Keith and then there is the , middle way that I 'm suggesting and that is you you get X , which is whatever , the castle . The ontology will tell us that castles have opening hours , that they have admission fees , they have whatever . And then , this is We go via a thesaurus and look up certain linguistic surface structures that are related to these concepts and feed those through the dialogue history and check dynamically for each e entity . We look it up check whether any of these were mentioned and then activate the corresponding nodes on the discourse side . But Keith suggested that a a much cleaner way would be is , you know , to keep track of the discourse in such a way that you if you know that something like that ha has been mentioned before , this just a continues to add up , you know , in th in a grad a: So if someone mentions admission f fees , that activates an Enter schema which sticks around for a little while in your rep in the representation of what 's being talked about . And then when someone asks " where is X ? " you 've already got the the Enter schema activated grad b: Kind of a priming professor c:   professor c:  grad d: Well , is it doesn't it seem like if you just managed the dialogue history with a a thread , that you know , kept track of ho of the activity of  , cuz it would the the thread would know what nodes like , needed to be activated , so it could just keep track of how long it 's been since something 's been mentioned , and automatically load it in . But here 's here 's a way in th in the bl Bayes - net you could you could think about it this way , that if  at the time " admissions fee " was mentioned you could increase the probability that someone wanted to enter . grad d: We - yeah th th that 's what I wa I wasn't I was I wasn't thinking in terms of Enter schemas . I was just professor c: Fair enough , OK , but , but , in terms of the c c the current implementation right ? so that  grad b: It would already be higher in the context . professor c: th that th the the the conditional probability that someone So at the time you mentioned it This is this is essentially the Bayes - net equivalent of the spreading activation . professor c: It 's In some ways it 's not as good but it 's the implementation we got . Now Now my guess is that it 's not a question of time but it is a question of whether another intervening object has been mentioned . professor c: we could look at dialo this is Of course the other thing we ha we do is , is we have this data coming grad a: Yeah . professor c: but but skipping that so so but my guess is what what 'll probably will happen , Here 's a here 's a proposed design . is that there 're certain constructions which , for our purposes do change the probabilities of EVA decisions and various other kinds and th that the , standard way that that the these contexts work is sort of stack - like or whatever , but that 's sort of the most recent thing . And so it could be that when another  , en tourist entity gets mentioned , you grad b: Renew professor c: re re essentially re - initiali you know , re - i essentially re - initialize the state . professor c: And of course i if we had a fancier one with multiple worlds you could have  , you could keep track of what someone was  saying about this and that . professor c: You know , " I wanna go in the morning grad a: " Here 's my plan for today . " professor c: Yeah , or Yeah , in the morning morning I I 'm planning t to go shopping , grad a: hypothetically . professor c: tal so I 'm talking about shopping and then you say , you know , well ,  " What 's it cost ? " or something . professor c: But I do th think that the It 'll turn out that it 's gonna be depend pretty much on whether there 's been an override . grad e: Yeah , if if you ask " how much does a train ride and and cinema around the vineyards cost ? " and then somebody tells you it 's sixty dollars and then you say " OK How much is ,  I would like to visit the " whatever , something completely different , " then I go to , you know , Point Reyes " , professor c: Yeah . grad e: it it 's not more likely that you want to enter anything , but it 's , as a matter of fact , a complete rejection of entering by doing that . grad b: So when you admit have admission fee and it changes something , it 's only for that particular It 's relational , right ? It 's only for that particular object . Well , and and and the simple idea is that it 's on it 's only for m for the current  , tourist e entity of instre interest . But that 's  this this function , so , has the current object been mentioned in in with a question about concerning its professor c: No , no . Is When th When the this is mentioned , the  probability of of , let 's say , entering changes grad b: Of that object . grad d: You could just hav  , just basically , ob it It observes an er , it sets the a node for " entered " or " true " or something , professor c: Yeah . Now ,  But I think Ro - Robert 's right , that to determine that , OK ? you may well want to go through a th thesaurus grad d: " discourse enter " . professor c: and and So , if the issue is , if so now th this construction has been matched and you say " OK . Does this actually have any implications for our decisions ? " Then there 's another piece of code that presumably does that computation . professor c: But but what 's Robert 's saying is is , and I think he 's right , is you don't want to try to build into the construction itself all the synonyms and all you know , all the wo  maybe . Well , it 's just another , sort of , construction side is how to get at the possible inferences we can draw from the discourse history or changing of the probabilities , and - or grad b: Guess it 's like I g The other thing is , whether you have a m m user model that has , you know , whatever , a current plan , whatever , plans that had been discussed , and I don't know ,  grad d: What  , what 's the argument for putting it in the construction ? Is it just that the s synonym selection is better , or ? professor c: Oh , wel Well , the ar the The argument is that you 're gonna have the If you 've recognized the word , you 've recognized the word , which means you have a lexical construction for it , so you could just as well tag the lexical construction with the fact that it 's a  , you know , thirty percent increase in probability of entering . You So you could you could you could invert invert the whole thing , so you s you tag that information on to the lexicon grad d: Mmm . at at Yeah , and this is grad e: Even though  the lexical construction itself out out of context , won't do it . grad e: " But I but I 'm not interested in the opening times " is sort of a more a V type . But , we 'll   , we have time to This is a s just a sidetrack , but  I think it 's also something that people have not done before , is  , sort of abuse an ontology for these kinds of , inferences , on whether anything relevant to the current something has been  , has crept up in the dialogue history already , or not . And ,  I have the ,  If we wanted to have that function in the dialogue hi dialogue module of SmartKom , I have the written consent of Jan to put it in there . professor c: So the point is , it 's very likely that Robert 's thesis is going to be along these lines , grad b: Oh , s professor c: and the local rules are if it 's your thesis , you get to decide how it 's done . So if , you know if this is seriously , if this becomes part of your thesis , you can say , hey we 're gonna do it this way , that 's the way it 's done . So h he 's got a th he 's got a meet meeting in Germany with his thesis advisor .  , this is this is , speaking of hard problems , this is a very good time  , to start trying to make explicit where construal comes in and you know , where c where the construction per - se ends and where construal comes in , grad a:   But that 's part of what the f grad b: We have many jobs for you , Ro - Robert . professor c: is is because th it is gonna have implicit in it grad e: Was I ? In the room ? grad b: No , you weren't there on purpose . professor c: Yeah , that That 's the point , is is th grad a: Yeah . grad d: Yeah , but it he the decisions I made wer had to do with my thesis . So consequently don't I get to decide then that it 's Robert 's job ? professor c: No . grad b: Well , I 'll just pick a piece of the problem and then just push the hard stuff into the center and say it 's Robert 's . grad e: I 've always been completely in favor of consensus decisions , grad b: I can professor c: Right . professor c: not grad e: It it might even be interesting then to say that I should be forced to  , sort of pull some of the ideas that have been floating in my head out of the ,  out of the top hat professor c: Yes . grad e: Yes , and , it 's Ha - None of that is basically still around , grad b: I didn't get professor c: And a another draft OK . grad e: but it 's professor c: D i grad a: That 's normal . professor c: I i grad b: Oh , I guess it 's good I didn't read it . professor c: and grad e: Yeah , and I would like to d discuss it and , you know , get you guys 's input professor c: Right . professor c:  So that , so th thi this  , so this is the point , is we we 're going to have to cycle through this , grad a: Yeah . professor c: but th the draft of the p proposal on the constructions is is going to tell us a lot about what we think needs to be done by construal . grad b:  grad e: Meeting regular meeting time for the summer , we really haven't found one . It 's - it 's a coincidence that he can't do couldn't do it today here . professor c: And the NTL meeting moved to Wednesday , grad e: So professor c: cuz of of ,  grad e: Yeah , it was just an exception . professor c: Yeah , you weren't here , but but but s  , And so , if that 's OK with you , grad a: It 's i Is it staying basically at the Wednesday noon ? professor c: you would grad a: OK . How do we feel about doing it Wednesdays ? Because it seems to me that this is sort of a time where when we have things to discuss with other people , there they seem to be s tons of people around . professor c: The only disadvantage is that it may interfere with other grad e: Or subgroup meetings professor c: s you know , other other No , you  , people in this group connecting with with grad b: Those people who happen to be around . I I  you know I have no fixed grad a: To tell you the truth , I 'd rath I 'd , I 'd would like to avoid more than one ICSI meeting per day , if possible .  that grad e: The I 'd like to have them all in one day , grad a: Yeah , I can understand that . professor c: Well p grad e: so package them up and then professor c: people people differ in their tastes in this matter . I 'm always here anyway , grad e: It 's OK , that grad b: so It doesn't matter . grad e: Well , if one sort of thing is , this room is taken at after three - thirty pr pretty much every day by the data collection . grad e: So we just knew i grad b: So did you just say that Ami can't make one o ' grad e: No , he can . About the c the th grad b: Could we do Thursday at one - thirty ? Would that that be horrible ? grad e: No . grad b: Oh really ? grad e: Because , this room is again taken at two - thirty by Morgan . grad e: And the s meeting recorder meeting meeting meeting recording on meeting meetings grad b: OK , OK , OK . professor c: I I could grad b:  we usually meet Tuesday or l like , linguists  , at two . Do you want to meet again here bef grad d: And the s Is the Speech - Gen meeting still at on Tuesdays ? grad e:  w Well , actually we w we we did scrap our Monday time just because Bhaskara couldn't come Monday . grad a: That doesn't apply to a grad d: Although I thought you wanted to go camping on Monday er , take off Mondays a lot so you could go camping .  ! grad b: Well , the linguists ' meeting i happens to be at two , but I think that 's  . grad a: And , you know , of course Nancy and I are just sort of always talking anyway and sometimes we do it in that room . grad e: Monday ? professor c: OK , whate  What I think Robert 's saying is that grad a: Earlier in the week professor c: earlier we At least for next week , there 's a lot of stuff we want to get done , grad a:   grad b: At o o o o one , two , three ? grad e: One , two , three ? Three 's too late . professor c: Oh , I i Yeah , I actually Two is the earliest I can meet on Monday . professor c: Here I 'm blissfully agreeing to things and realizing that I actually do have some stuff scheduled on Monday . grad b: You guys will still remind me , right ? grad d: No way ! grad b: Y you 'll come and take all the the headph the good headphones first and then remind me . grad e: And grad b: Why do I have this unless I 'm gonna write ? grad e: do I get to see th  , your formalism before that ? grad b: Fine . grad e: I wo I would like I would sort of get a get a notion of what what you guys have in store for me . professor c: Well m @ @ you know , w maybe Mond - Maybe we can put This is part of what we can do Monday , if we want . grad b: Yeah , so there was like , you know , m m in my head the goal to have like an intermediate version , like , everything I know . grad b: And then , w I would talk to you and figure out everything you know , that you know , see if they 're consistent . Why don't w Maybe you and I should meet sort of more or less first thing Monday morning and then we can work on this . I might I might  , grad e: You - y grad b: s You said you 're busy over th until the weekend , right ? grad a: Yeah , sort of through the weekend because Kate has a photography show . So , maybe I 'll send you some grad a: if you have time after this I 'll show you the noun phrase thing . OK , and we 'll You wanna m grad e: So the idea is on Monday at two we 'll we 'll see an intermediate version of the formalism for the constructions , grad a: Yeah . grad b: So that 's OK for you grad e: and do an on - line merging with my construal ideas . grad e: So it won't be , like , a for semi - formal presentation of my proposal . grad b: Cuz then you 'll find out more of what we 're making you do . Can you also write it up ? grad b: It 's like , " this is what we 're doing . " grad e: I 'll I 'll send you I 'll I 'll send you a style file , right ? grad b: OK . grad e: You just grad b: I already sent you my fi my bib file . grad a: Someday we also have to we should probably talk about the other side of the " where is X " construction , which is the issue of , how do you simulate questions ? What does the simspec look like for a question ? grad e: Yeah . professor c: Yeah , now , we we w grad a: We had to we had an idea for this which seemed like it would probably work . I professor c: OK ? So let 's think of a name for for whatever the this intermediate structure is . Oh , we talked about semspec , for " semantic spec specification " grad a: Mmm . grad a: It 's more general professor c: You know , so it 's a m minimal change . professor c: Right , a little substi substi You know , that 's what text substitution  macros are for . professor c: Anyway , so let 's let 's for the moment call it that until we think of something better . professor c: And , yeah , we absolutely need to find Part of what was missing were markings of all sorts that weren't in there , incl including the questions grad a:   professor c: We didn't we never did figure out how we were gonna do emphasis in in  , the semspec . grad b: Yeah , we 've talked a little bit about that , too , which  , it 's hard for me to figure out with sort of our general linguistic issues , how they map onto this particular one , grad a: Yeah . professor c: But that 's part of the formalism is got to be  , how things like that get marked . grad b: W do you have data , like the the You have preliminary data ? Cuz I know , you know , we 've been using this one easy sentence and I 'm sure you guys have  , maybe you are the one who 've been looking at the rest of it grad a: I grad b: it 'd it 'd be useful for me , if we want to have it a little bit more data oriented . grad a: To tell you the truth , what I 've been looking at has not been the data so far , grad b: Yeah . grad a: I just sort of said " alright let 's see if I can get noun phrases and , major verb co  , constructions out of the way first . grad a: So , I have not really approached a lot of the data , but  obviously like these the the question one , since we have this idea about the indefinite pronoun thing and all that , you know , I ca can try and ,  run with that , you know , try and do some of the sentence constructions now . grad a: Oh yeah , the basic idea is that  ,  you know  , let 's see if I can formulate this . grad e: So you perform the mental sum and then , you know , " who fixed the car with a wrench ? " You basically are told , to to do this In the in analogously to the way you would do " someone fixed the car with a wrench " . And then you hand it back to your hippocampus and find out what that , you know , grad a: Means . grad a: The WH question has this as sort of extra thing which says " and when you 're done , tell me who fills that slot " or w you know . And , you know , this is sort of a nice way to do it , the idea of sort of saying that you treat from the simulation point of view or whatever you treat , WH constructions similarly to  , indefinite pronouns like " someone fixed the car " because lots of languages , have WH questions with an indefinite pronoun in situ or whatever , grad b: Use actually the same one . So it makes sense professor c: Alright , which is grad a:  professor c: Skolemization . professor c: In in logic , it 's it 's @ @ it 's actual Huh ? grad b: Right . professor c: That - that 's not that 's not saying it 's bad , grad a: Right . Anyway , but just that kind of thing and we 'll figure out exactly how to write that up and so on , but professor c: Good . We sort of just dropped that cuz it was too weird and we didn't even know , like , what we were talking about exactly , what the object of study was . Well , if if  , i part of of what the exercise is , t by the end of next week , is to say what are the things that we just don't have answers for yet . grad e: Well , if you if you do wanna discuss focus background and then get me into that because  , I wo I w scientifically worked on that for for almost two years . grad b: Yeah , you should definitely ,  be on on that maybe maybe by after Monday we 'll y you can see what things we are and aren't grad a: Yeah . grad b: I would say that tha that those discussions have been primarily , Keith and Keith and me , but  like in th the meeting  , he sort of I thin like the last meeting we had , I think we were all very much part of it grad a: Yeah . grad b: but  grad a: Sometimes Hans has been sort of coming in there as sort of like a devil 's advocate type role or something , grad b: but different perspec Yeah . grad a: like " This make you know , I 'm going to pretend I 'm a linguist who has nothing to do with this . " And he 'll just go off on parts of it which definitely need fixing grad b: Right . grad a: but aren't where we 're at right now , so it 's grad b: Like like what you call certain things , grad a: Yeah . grad b: But in a sense , it 's good to know that he of all people professor c: OK . grad b: you know , like maybe a lot of people would have m much stronger reactions , so , you know , he 's like a relatively friendly linguist grad a: Yeah . professor c: OK , which was that o one of the things I would like to see happen is a paper that was tentatively called " Towards a formal cognitive semantics " which was addressed to these linguists  who haven't been following this stuff at all . professor c: So it could be that he 's actually , at some level , thinking about how am I going to communicate this story grad a: Yeah . professor c: But if he g if he turns is is really gonna turn around and help t to write this version that does connect with as many as possible of the other linguists in the world  then then it becomes important to use terminology that doesn't make it hard grad a:   professor c: it 's gonna be plenty hard for for people to understand it as it is , grad a: Yeah . I just wanted t to I have to catch up with him , and I wanted t to get a feeling for that . grad a: So I don't know what his take will be on these meetings exactly , you know . grad a: Cuz sometimes he sort of sounds like we 're talking a bunch of goobledy - gook from his point of view . grad b: I think it 's good when we 're when we 're into data and looking at the some specific linguistic phenomenon in in English or in German , in particular , whatever , that 's great , professor c: Yeah . grad b: and Ben and and Hans are , if if anything , more you know , they have more to say than , let 's say , I would about some of these things . grad b: But when it 's like , well , w how do we capture these things , you know , I think it 's definitely been Keith and I who have d you know , who have worried more about the grad a:   That 's I I I think that should be the the core group grad b: s Which is fine . professor c: and  that 's , you know , I think very close to the maximum number of people working together that can get something done . And then we 're gon we 're gonna because of this other big thing we haven't talked about is actually implementing this stuff ? So that I guess the three of us are gonna connect tomorrow about that . I was just gonna say , though , that , for instance , there was you know , out of a meeting with Johno came the suggestion that " oh , could it be that the meaning constraints really aren't used for selection ? " which has sort of been implicit in the parsing strategy we talked about . grad b: In which case we w we can just say that they 're the effects or the bindings . Which  , so far , in terms of like putting up all the constraints as , you know , pushing them into type constraints , the when I 've , you know , propo then proposed it to linguists who haven't yet given me you know , we haven't yet thought of a reason that that wouldn't work . professor c: Yeah , it has to in the sense that you 're gonna use them eventu it 's you know , it 's sort of a , generate and test kind of thing , grad b: if there are some constraints that you hold back and don't use  , in your initial matching then you 'll match some things grad b:   professor c: I I d I don't think there 's any way that it could completely fail . It it could be that  , you wind up  The original bad idea of purely context - free grammars died because there were just vastly too many parses . And so th the concern might be that not that it would totally fail , but that grad b:   Right ? So by just having semantic even bringing semantics in for matching just in the form of j semantic types , right ? professor c: it would still genera grad b: Like " conceptually these have to be construed as this , this , and this " might still give us quite a few possibilities professor c: Yeah .  , cuz I think i I think it 's As you know , I think it 's real hard and if w if we Right . grad e: So , you your dance card is completely filled now ? grad a: Shoot . grad e: Why don't grad b: No , that 's not really true , grad a: Bummer . grad b: but like grad d: What about What about DDR ? grad b: It 's almost true . grad f:  grad b: Oh , I don't have it this weekend , so , tsk don't have to worry about that . professor c: DDR , he asked ? grad b: Speaking of dance , Dance Dance Revolution I can't believe I 'm It 's a it 's like a game , but it 's for , like , dancing . Hard to It 's like karaoke , but for dancing , and they tell you what It 's amazing . Well , y you know of it ? I i i it 's one of your hobbies ? It 's great exercise , I must say . They have , like , places instead of like Yeah , instead of karaoke bars now that have , like , DDR , like Yeah , yeah , I didn't until I started hanging out with this friend , who 's like " Oh , well , I can bring over the DDR if you want
I'm very pleased to welcome Meilyr Rowlands, Her Majesty's Chief Inspector, Estyn; Jassa Scott, strategic director at Estyn; and Claire Morgan, strategic director at Estyn. Thank you for the papers upfront, in which you say that the most striking feature of the education system, looking forward, of course is the curriculum and the change that that's bringing. How can we be sure that, during this period of change, standards don't slip? And also, from the point of view of scrutiny, will we be back in a situation where we're being told, 'You can't compare one set of results against the previous year's results, because of the nature of the change'? meilyr rowlands: Bore da, bawb. I think any kind of major educational reform has got risks attached to it, particularly if those changes were made too quickly. I think this process of reform has been going on in the background for a few years now, so I think there is a track record of standards and provision not slipping. So, overall, I think we can be fairly confident that standards won't slip during this period of preparation. suzy davies am: Can I just ask: is that based on your evidence around primary schools, where the sort of ethos that we've seen in the curriculum has been already articulated through the foundation phase? meilyr rowlands: The track record I'm talking about is across the board, so it's very difficult to think of anything that's actually got worse over the last three or four years, so it's difficult to say that standards of provision is slipping. It might not be improving as quickly as we would like, but the purpose of major curriculum and, more generally, educational reform is to make sure that we do get a more substantial sort of improvement. A large number of schools and teachers and leaders have been part of preparing the new curriculum and all the associated work, as well as doing the day job. I think their commitment and their engagement with curriculum reform, and engagement with wider education reform, is to be congratulated. So, I think going forward, we must make sure that that is continued; that this process that's called co-constructionengaging with the profession, making sure that they're behind all the changescontinues. I think that's what's going to make sure that we don't see any slippage. suzy davies am: Okay, and on that point of comparing year on year, we will be able to make those comparisons legitimately then? meilyr rowlands: Yes, certainly, in terms of our inspection outcomes and our inspection work, yes. Can I just ask you then about the difference in preparedness between primary and secondary schools, which I've just mentioned previously, and also what your views are on the impact of funding for schools on that as well? Because we're in a situation where a number of primary schools have got surplus funds, sometimes that's because of end of year additional funds just being magicked up, but there is a serious worry that so many secondary schools are in deficit and that, overall, secondary schools are in deficit. Is there a correlation between those two positions, that secondary schools may be less ready for this than primary schools? meilyr rowlands: I think it's probably true to say that secondary schools have a greater challenge than primary schools generally in terms of preparedness for the new curriculum. With any sort of education reform, you've got that danger of people wanting to see change as soon as possible on the one hand, and on the other hand you need time to pilot things, to make sure that people have the right professional learning and make sure that there's opportunity for evaluation and thinking and so forth. suzy davies am: Sorry, that could be difficult to do if a school doesn't have money to create that space, couldn't it? meilyr rowlands: Yes. One, about the difference between primary and secondary: I think what I'm saying there is I think the fact that the new curriculum is going to be brought in for all the years in primary, but it's going to be phased in year by year for secondary is a recognition of that difference. In terms of funding, probably everyone in this room, and certainly me included, would like to see more money for the education systemany educationalist would like to see that. But, you know, that is a decision for local and central Government to decide how much they can afford. suzy davies am: Can I ask, just to keep it on track, are you finding that that's having an impact on secondary schools particularlytheir ability to make space to get their heads around the curriculum? meilyr rowlands: I don't think you can make that straightforward correlation. But if you do look at surpluses and reserves, they have been more or less constant for primary schools over a long period of time, but they have declined for secondary schools. So, I think there probably is an argument for saying that we need to look at the funding of secondary schools in particular because, overall, they're in deficit now. The other thing that's worth saying about funding is that even a small decrease in real terms can be disproportionately time consuming to manage. So, you know, if you have a large school and you have to maybe make one member of staff redundant, it can have a real big effect on the morale in the school. But also the time it takes for the headteacher and the senior staff to make those decisions can take their eye off the educational ball because they're looking at these financial and staffing issues. The final question from me is: there's a general concern about the number of teachers that we have in the system at the moment, particularly at secondary level and in particular subjects as well. How do you think we can improve that? What impact is it likely to have on the ability of secondary schools to really get a grip on this? meilyr rowlands: Obviously, the most important resource for the education system is the teachers. So, it is a concern that recruitment is getting more and more difficult and that targets for initial teacher training are not being hit. And we're not seeing them hit, if I remember correctly, even in primary, let alone secondary. So, there is a challenge, and I think we've got to look at this in the round. We've got to make sure that we have both a long-term strategy and a shorter term strategy for this. So, long term, we've got to make sure that education is an attractive option for young people and more mature people to want to go into. I think there's a general acceptance now that that needs to be higher up on the agenda, that people need to take that seriously, and there's work going on regarding the workload issue. suzy davies am: I suppose what I'm coming to, and I will finish with this, Chair, is, we're asking our existing workforce to undertake a fair bit of continuous professional developmentlet's call it thatin order to get ready for this curriculum when they've barely got time for lunch as it is. Do you think that's going to have an impact on the ability of secondary schools to get to grips with this, albeit that there'll be a phasing in? meilyr rowlands: Yes. I think the new curriculum, one of the things about the new curriculum is that it re-professionalises the profession. And one of the reasons why teaching maybe hasn't been that attractive a profession is that teachers in the past have just been delivering a set curriculum, and now they've got a much more creative part in deciding for themselves how to teach something and what to teach. I think we need to have a much more varied set of routes into teaching, so I welcome some of the part-time Open University courses, for example. So, there are lots of wayswe were talking about maybe converting people from primary into secondary, particularly in Welsh-medium, where there's a shortage. Just before going on to that, just to pick up on that last point that you made about the shortage of teachers and losing teachers during the first year of their training. Has Estyn done any themed work on that particular issue, or do you intend to do anything on that? Also, looking at the financial incentives and how they compare with the situation in England, for example; do we need, perhaps, to think about financial incentives, not just for specific subjects, but for going to schools where there are particular issues, perhaps? meilyr rowlands: Well, yes, there are currently discussions ongoing between us and the Government about working in those early years for teachers. I know that Professor Mick Waters is looking at this currently, and we've had the discussion with him. Now, we are, of course, looking at initial teacher training, but we haven't looked at the first couple of years for many a year. And for your information, I've commissioned a piece of work on that particular issue, and that work will be published in due course. sian gwenllian am: In terms of the secondary schools, thats where the problem lies, isnt it, rather than the primary sector. How much of a concern is it to you that childrens chances of going to a secondary school that is good or better appear to be 50:50, and that, indeed, over 10 per cent of secondary schools are judged to be failing and 12 per cent are under Estyn review? How much of a concern is that to you? meilyr rowlands: Well, it is of concern to us, of course. I hope that we will have an opportunity to talk about the positive aspects of the education system in Wales, because there are a number of good things we can report also. The primary sector, the special sector, post-16there are many sectors that are doing well, and I think a story that's particularly positive this year is that we have seen pupil referral units improving. We have seen examples of excellent practice in that sector for the first time in many a year, and we've also seen excellent practice in independent special schools, which is also a sector. But, you're right, of course, the biggest concern for the system, I would say, is secondary schools, and that is an issue of leadership, and also of the quality of the teaching and learning. So, I believe that there is a need to find a long-term solution, as I mentioned previously, and also a short-term solution to this problem. In the long term, to improve the quality of teaching and learningwell, thats the main aim of the new curriculum. It will take time, as we mentioned previously; it will take longer in secondary schools, and that's for a number of reasons, and I have discussed the challenges that are additional for secondary schools in previous annual reports. Its more difficult to engage with the parents of older children than younger children, and thats an important factor. Thats one of the reasons why I believe its important that we do have community schools that ensure that the parents are part of the schools life and take an interest in the education of their children. We also know that qualifications take a very prominent role in secondary schools mindsets, and, in some cases, perhaps excessively so. So, we need to ensure that those qualifications are reformed as a result of the reform of the curriculum, and, of course, Qualifications Wales is carrying out that work currently. In primary schools, for example, the greatest and most obvious difference, I would say, is that youve got one teacher who looks after a child for a whole year, and that teacher can identify the needs of the pupil very well over a period of time, getting to know the child and, possibly, the family very well. Its much more complicated for secondary school to do that; there have to be systems put in place for that. But in the short term, what is important is that those schools that cause concern receive much more support, and that is why I am glad and do welcome what's being piloted currently, which is a system of supporting these schools, the multi-agency approach, that is. So, that is something that we have been calling for for quite a long period of time and piloted ourselves a few years ago. sian gwenllian am: You said previously that it's a cause of concern for you that these schools that are failing or underachieving are not identified early enough. Are there signs that that's improving? meilyr rowlands: Well, one of the things that's very positive about this pilot scheme is that it's not just the schools that are officially causing concern that are a part of the pilot scheme, that is, the schools that we have identified, through inspections, as needing to be put in a statutory category. So, there are schools involved in the pilot scheme that the authorities and the consortia have identified themselves as schools that are at risk of causing concern. I believe that it's fair to say that we have not reached a point yet where we have a system of agreed criteria in relation to identifying these schools yet. I think that there has been initial work that has been commissioned or that is about to arrive in relation to that, and the types of measures you would expect us to take account of would be dissatisfaction from parents, staff leaving, a change in leadership. We use surveys with the children, for instance, and that gives you quite a good idea of whether a school is possibly facing difficulties. So, there's not one single criteria alone that will tell you, 'This is a school that is at risk of causing concern', but taken together, having a set of criteria that everyone has agreed would be a good way of monitoring schools, I believe. Well, we'll be coming on to that middle tier later on, and perhaps that's where the problem lies, namely that if there isn't an agreed system from consortia and yourselves, perhaps that's where the focus needs to be. meilyr rowlands: I would say that it's not the identification of the schools that is the greatest problem. The greatest problem is ensuring that there is support for them and that the support is multi-agency support, where all the agencies that support these schools are working together. sian gwenllian am: Well, how long does it take, therefore, for a school to move from an improvement category, in terms of special measures, to be escalated then? Because one sees sometimes that there's an excellent school, and within five years' time, it's in the red. meilyr rowlands: Well, that would be something quite unusualto move from excellent to red. claire morgan: On average, secondary schools that are in need of special measures take just over two years, on average. With primary schools, of course, it's much shorter because the issues are far less complex; it's easier to bring about improvements in teaching. When you've got large numbers of staff, you've got large secondary schools, it takes time to actually bring about those improvements, but it is a long time, just over two years, when you think that some pupils, maybe in key stage 4 for the two years. Certainly, we want to see schools coming out of category much quicker, and this is where the multi-agency approach certainly is a positive step. They focus on bringing about improvement in the areas of the school that are weakest, and it is the responsibility of everybody involvedthat is: ourselves, the regions, local authorities, the schools themselves and their governing bodiesto look at how they can best support the school to bring about that improvement. So, it's getting an agreement on what the issues are, and then planning the support so that we avoid duplication, but that we support the school in the areas they need more support. But, as Meilyr already said, there are some schools involved in that particular pilot that are at danger of causing serious concern. And just finally from me, for the time being at least, the financial situation; we've spoken about that already this morning. If funding was injected into the system tomorrow, say, what would you spend it on? What aspects would benefit from that additional funding? meilyr rowlands: Were you asking about something specific there? sian gwenllian am: In the schools themselves, if you were a school leader, what would you meilyr rowlands: Oh, if I were a school leader. How would you use any additional funding that would flow into the school? meilyr rowlands: It's difficult to make that decision, because every school is different. It is important, of course, that leaders do have the power and the ability to make those decisions themselves. But, certainly, in the short term, the type of thing I would have thought would be to prepare for the new curriculum. The schools that have been a part of developing the curriculum have been in a fortunate position in that they've had plenty of time to think about this. So, it's now timeand this was the chief message of my annual report this yearfor every school in Wales to start to think. Because I think that the new curriculum is truly an opportunity to take a forward step in terms of how we teach and learn within schools. But that means that time is needed for schools to think this through and, in that thinking, to contact the community, to talk to their children as well, to see what the community in its broader sense would like to see being in the new curriculum, because it's up to every school. Although the new curriculum sets a framework, it is up to each and every school to decide what they're going to teach, and what they're teaching in order to prepare their young people for this new world that we have in the twenty-first century. Therefore, to give you a somewhat superficial answer, I would be setting time aside for the training of teachers. jassa scott: Can I just add one thing there? I think what we've seen over the years recently is that local authorities, to some extent, have safeguarded the funding that goes to the schools, but the effect of that is that we've seen less funding going into some of the local authority services; for example, those services that support well-being, that promote attendance, and that perhaps support behaviour and assistance for schools. So, I think that all of those factors contribute to how schools can support and assist their pupils, and to improve themselves. So, I think that side of things is important as wellin the school or in the local authority, if funding is available, it should be allocated to all of those things so that those services can also support the children to succeed. lynne neagle am: Just before we move on to the middle tier, if I can just ask about the quality of teaching? There's been a consistent message from Estyn that that is the weakest part of the system in Wales. The Government recognises that and has invested a very significant amount of money in that area, yet it's still an issue again in your annual report. What is your assessment of whether we are seeing the improvements we need to see in the quality of teaching? meilyr rowlands: I think, in nearly all the elements of our framework, the picture is fairly similar. So, in terms of quality of teaching, we have seen gradual but quite small-scale improvements in primary. In secondary, it's more or less level; we haven't seen it getting particularly better or particularly worse. One of the things that's really important to realise is that the curriculum is about the quality of teaching. It is about the teaching and learning; those are two sides of the same coin, if you like. From the perspective of the pupil, it's the learning; from the perspective of the teacher, it's the teaching. I think there's no doubt and I think there's general agreement that, in order to have a step change in the quality of teaching and learning. I think it was Einstein who said that if you keep on doing the same thing, you'll get the same result. So, you're going to have to change something, and what's changing is the curriculum. And that's exactly what all schools need to do now: to think how does this new curriculum affect them in their particular school, in their particular circumstances, in the context of their particular children. How can they use this opportunity now to improve the teaching and learning in their school? lynne neagle am: Sin. sian gwenllian am: It does cause one concern, because if the teaching and learning standards just stay the same in the secondary sector, and we know that 12 per cent of secondary schools are under Estyn review and 11 per cent of them are in special measures, we're talking about half of the schools almost, and no improvement in the teaching quality in general. So, there is a major cohort of children captured in that situation, and then there's a new curriculum that comes in. I see the opportunities, but these schools that are doing well are going to go, 'Wow, up there', but schools are there in the bottom layer and one is genuinely concerned about those children in those schools. Isn't that where the focus should be and any additional funding that's allocated? You talked about releasing teachers for training, but perhaps it's in those particular schools that we need to focus. meilyr rowlands: I do agree that the best schools will welcome the opportunities and that their standards will improve even more. But then, with regard to the other schools, in a way, there are two very broad categories, which are those that need only a little support just to help them to improve. And I believe that the new curriculum and the general support that's going to be surrounding that will be the solution for those schools. But you're right to say that there is another smaller cohort that has a much greater need for support, and they're going to find coping with the new curriculum difficult, because they'll also have many other problems. And you're not talking about a huge number of schoolssome 200 secondary schools is what we have in Wales, so that percentage is relatively small, the number is relatively smallbut they need much greater support. I don't think it's enormous, but certainly there's a certain amount of funding that is needed to offer those schools that support. The Minister recently told the committee that a number of recent Estyn inspections of local authorities' education services have been disappointing. Do you agree? That, of course, is based on the inspections carried out under the current cycle. But of those nine we've put three into categorywe've identified them as causing concernand they're Pembrokeshire, Powys and Wrexham. So, we've talking quite a bit about secondary schools this morning, and I think that, again, is a factor in those local authorities. You say that the proportion of secondary schools causing concern is a challenge for several local authorities and for the system as a whole. Which local authorities are theseyou've probably named them alland have these been inspected yet under the current cycle? meilyr rowlands: I think you're taking about three secondary schools in a category in Pembrokeshire, Wrexham and Torfaen. So, we've inspected Pembrokeshire and Wrexham already, but we haven't inspected Torfaen yet. And we've inspected Powys and Newport, but we haven't inspected Gwynedd yet. So, in answer to your question: we've inspected most of those, but not all of them. What is your latest assessment of how well the regional consortia are supporting and driving school improvement? Does this vary across the different regions? meilyr rowlands: It certainly does vary, but I'll ask Jassa to go into more detail. jassa scott: We haven't directly inspected the regional consortia sinceI think 2017 was the last time we did some direct monitoring with them. But I think, over the last three years, we do feel that they've improved their knowledge. So, they did take a little while to embed, and I think that came across when we did the work that we did with them back in 2017. But, more recently, they've improved their knowledge of individual schools' strengths and areas for improvement, and they are using this knowledge better to support and challenge schools, and particularly schools causing concern. But obviously, as we've been talking about this morning, there's still work to do. I think they've prioritised well the work that schools are doing around literacy and numeracy, but their support for schools to develop digital competence has been a bit weaker. Even though we've had the framework as an early part of the curriculum developments there, we haven't seen quite the focus that we've seen on other areas. I think for schools causing concern, what we foundand we do look at their work through our local authority inspection, so we are getting some first-hand evidence of their impact through thatthey're not always focused, in those schools causing concern, on improving teaching and learning, so actually getting in and looking and working with teachers and with staff to actually make improvements there. I think, generally, their support for secondary schools has had less impact across the consortia than it has for primary schools, and I think sometimes that's because they're struggling to recruit appropriate specialists, to support with secondary, or perhaps they don't have the depth of strong practice that we talked about earlier within their region. So, they're having to work a bit harder to find effective practice, to share practice and to get the secondary expertise and knowledge to support those schools. We will be, over the next year, looking specifically at the work of consortia to support curriculum reform work. But that's one of the areas we've discussed, about doing some specific work on over the next year to look in a bit more depth. janet finch-saunders am: So, what is the cycle of inspections for regional consortia, and how robust are those inspections? What areas do you cover? jassa scott: Well, regional consortia aren't actually statutory entities at the moment, and we don't have specific inspection powers relating to regional consortia. So, on each of our local authority inspections, there will be, usually, an area that we're looking at that relates to school improvement, and that would involve us looking at the work of the consortia that the local authority has commissioned. What we've agreed with Welsh Government is that, over the next few years, we will take a thematic approach. So, the first area that we've said is that we'll look specifically at how each of them is supporting curriculum reform, and report on that. So, that will report specifically on the different ones, but it wouldn't be the same as doing an inspection of their work at this time. janet finch-saunders am: Should they be on a statutory footing? jassa scott: Well, I think that's something to be discussed over the next few years. There's, obviously, local government legislation that has been debated recently, which has the potential to create corporate joint committees, and school improvement was one of the areas that is being considered there. So, there may be an opportunity, if that's created, to think how we then adapt inspection to look specifically at that. I think we do get a handle on their work through the local authority and, ultimately, it's looking at what that consortia brings to that local authority and to the schools and the pupils in that area that's the important bit, I think, ultimately, to see the impact there. So, we are looking at them in that way, and then taking that thematic approach, but we'll keep reviewing it over the next couple of years. And what are Estyn's views on the latest position regarding regional working in south-west and mid Wales? Would it be preferable for school improvement advisers to be based in the consortium, Education through Regional Work, rather than each local authority employing their own, as is the case at present? meilyr rowlands: If I can just go back to the last question as well, what we did in order to inspect regions was we paused our local authority inspection cycle back in 2014, I think, for about three years. So, then, we spent time looking at regions, basically, because we didn't have the resource to do both at the same time. So, we're in negotiation with Welsh Government currently, so that, going forward, we can look at local authorities and regions at the same time. If regions become statutory entities, that would be in legislation, and then you could have legislation that gives us directly the powers to inspect them, which we don't currently have. But, as Jassa said, currently, what we intend to do in the short is to do some thematic work on that. In terms of ERW, they were the region that, at the end of the last cycle of regional inspections, we were still monitoring. So, for example, the chair of the joint committee has resigned, the managing director remains a temporary appointment and there are no clear plans for a permanent leadership. Some of the leadership team have leftthe capacity has gone downand various staff that were appointed last summer have already left. The budget has not been agreed and certain key meetingsexecutive board and joint committee meetingshave been cancelled. So, we are particularly worried about ERW, and, because of that, we will be going in to visit them in Aprilnext monthand we'll be visiting all of the authorities to make sure that they do have a plan for an appropriate school improvement service going forward. jassa scott: Yes, I think you asked a specific question about, you know, which is better. I think our view has been that, generally, the local authorities are too small to deliver that whole range of school improvement services, particularly given the national reform agenda at the moment. We felt last summer, when we went to ERW, that they'd managed to reach the best possible model, given the constraint they've placed, collectively, on themselvesthat they want to deliver aspects of school improvement locally, through the local authorities, and have some central capacity. So, we felt that, given that they wanted to do some locally and some centrally, enough thought had been put into that structure last summer and that it could be workable. There were key aspects such as support for secondary schools causing concern and there was some capacity centrally that could support areas such as Powys.Unfortunately, as Meilyr has described, some of those aspects have since been disbanded or those staff who were on secondment have gone back, so I think it is a key risk, particularly for some of those authorities you've talked about that are causing concern, such as Powys or Pembrokeshirethat they haven't necessarily got that local capacity to support their schools causing concern. So, you've got some concerns within school capacity and you've got concerns about local authority capacity, and what you don't have there now is that collective capacity centrally that might support them. So, that's why we're going to go and do a slightly more detailed link visit to try to understand how they are mitigating the risks that we see are arising as a result of some of those things that have happened recently. Our understanding is that there's a joint committee meeting of ERW on 19 March, so, hopefully, after that point, we'll have a little bit more information about how they're planning to manage that collective set of services going forwardit's a little bit of an unknown at the moment. meilyr rowlands: You were asking, 'Would it be better for every authority to have their own team?' But, before regions were invented, if you like, we were saying consistently that they tended to be too small. So, you had Cynnal in the north west, you had the Education and School Improvement Service, you had Gwentso, they naturally did come together in groups, maybe a little bit smaller than the current regions, but they, of their own accord, produced something not very dissimilar to a region. lynne neagle am: Sin, did you have a supplementary? sian gwenllian am: Yes, just on ERW. Does the fact that there is a dispute on the highest level feed down to the school and to the children? Are the children in south-west and mid Wales affected by this? Are standards decreasing in that part of Wales? meilyr rowlands: Well, it's difficult to say directly, but we have inspected nine authorities and two of those are in that area, so, the lack of support at that level, as Jassa was saying, may be the reason why those authorities are suffering difficulties. jassa scott: And it is clear that many people across that area are expending energy and time discussing these issues. Any reorganisation does take energy out of the system, so it is clear that that time isn't then being spent, perhaps, on investment in improving schools and supporting staff in schools. So, as Meilyr says, it's not clear, but a lot of energy is being expended in that particular discussion that is ongoing. janet finch-saunders am: What disadvantages could there be from Neath Port Talbot's intention to withdraw from regional working via ERW? And I've got to be honest, up in the north, I know that there are concerns about regional consortia, and when local authorities are under pressure financially, it questions, sometimes, the value of regional consortia. So, what disadvantages could there be from Neath Port Talbot's intention to withdraw from regional working via ERW? meilyr rowlands: I think we've talked in general terms and we feel that local authorities probably are too small on their own. In general terms, you can't say that any particular authority couldn't, maybe, put things together in such a way that it's effective. Also, it has a knock-on effect on the rest of the consortium, if one withdraws. I don't know whether, Jassa, you've got anything to add to the general points we've made. jassa scott: I think, what you've alluded to there, it has the potential to be a destabilising factor across the whole of the national model that we've got for supporting school improvement at a time where Welsh Government are kind of relying heavily on that consortium model to help support curriculum reform and to drive professional learning and be the conduit for lots of the aspects of reform that we've talked about. So, I think that potential risk of any destabilising across the system is a disadvantage generally. And I think it's just what I've already talked about in terms of being a distraction at a crucial time for support where schools need to feel that they're confident in where they need to go for support. I should say that we're planning, as part of that visit that we do in April, to survey schools in that region about the support that they're getting, be that from their authority or from the central teams in ERW. That's something we did at the time when we did the inspections previously, and we thought it would be helpful to get some first-hand views of any disadvantages or impact that they might be feeling, really. And then, finally, for me:what involvement has Estyn had with the strategic education delivery group chaired by Professor Dylan Jones and what are your expectations for how it will improve the work of the middle tier? meilyr rowlands: We've been members of that group right from the beginning. I personally am on it and colleagues are on it as well, and I'm a member of the sub-group that does some of the background work for that group as well, and Estyn has given several presentations to that group. The rather obvious thing is that you get all the strategic educational organisations together in one room, but it had never been done before, as far as I know. I'm a very firm believer in making those relationships, building those relationships, so that people understand what each of us contributes to the whole of the education system. We need to have that forum to be able to make sure that we're clear about what each of our roles is. In your report you talked about in early settings where skills development is less effective, that children begin to feel at a very early age that they can't do certain things. I don't know whether that is anecdotal evidence or is that specific outcome-based evidencewhatever, it's quite worrying. But what do you think the long-term effect on a child's development has in that respect? claire morgan: It's probably worth saying that skill development is a strength in about three quarters of our schoolsprimary schools and early years settings. But in a minority of schools and settings, as you've picked up, children are often introduced to things too early. So, they're introduced to phonics, they're introduced to learning to read, when they're not at that developmental stage. And really, long term, it means the children lose confidence, because if they're introduced to these things too early they don't succeed, they tend to need additional support, and it can give them a negative impression, it can give them negative thoughts about their ability. So, we need to address that, and really it's about dawn bowden am: Sorry, what sort of age range are we talking about here? claire morgan: These would be children from three to five. dawn bowden am: And is there something, then, in thatand I don't think there's much we can do about that, but it may be in terms of the way that the schools or the early learning settings address thisyou will have children at a very young age that have almost a year's difference in their age group, so they're born just before 1 September or just after 1 September? So, that's a huge gap, isn't it, at that point in their development? claire morgan: Yes. dawn bowden am: Is that not being addressed in a way that those children are being taught and approached at that age? claire morgan: Yes. In terms of reading and literacy skills, we still remain quite low in the Programme for International Student Assessment ratings for reading, and I know there is a particular concern about the impact on boys in that regard. What do you think are the most pressing priorities that face them around reading and literacy? meilyr rowlands: I think literacy has been, and still is, and still needs to be a top priority. , literacy clearly is something that underpins the rest of education, so it really does need to be a top priority. For example, we've given a lot of attention to writing over the years, and making sure that children get the opportunity to write in an extended way, not just short sentences, but having the opportunity to have extended writing, and there's some evidence that that now is beginning to have an effect. So, it's not just reading small little snippetswe need to encourage children to have a love for reading and read whole books. So, I gave a little bit of attention to that in the annual reportthat that needs attention. I think the other thing I would emphasise is that this is not just for the foundation phase, it's not just for very young childrenit's really important at key stage 2 and in secondary school. One of the things we have been worried about, and I think there was some reflection of this in PISA, is that there are strengths in reading in Wales. So, PISA, for example, said that children in Wales are very good at comparing lots of little snippets, but what they're saying, and they're saying this themselves, is that the love of books is decreasing, and the number of children who read regularly whole books. So, I think there is something there for teachers to set and model a good example, to show their own interest in reading, to encourage children to read themselves. dawn bowden am: It's probably a wider societal problem as well, isn't it? I'm thinking about gaming, electronic gaming, computers. I think there is some sort of link with the digital world, and the way people readthe actual technique of reading, is evolving. But I think reading is so important, and developing a complex vocabulary is so important in being able to communicate, in order to get a good job, to have enjoyment out of lifeall of those things are so important. We ourselves are going to give this quite a lot of priority in future, so we're doing a major piece of work on language acquisition, which will cover some of this next year. Every year one of our thematics is the major bit of work we do, and we try to support that with a conference. So,that will be the focus that we give to our work next yearit is on language acquisition. Just one other supplementary on that, I guess, is whether you have a good idea of how many young people are coming out of school at 16so, those that are not staying on to do A-levelsand are coming out with an inability to read or white. Do we know what the figure is for that? meilyr rowlands: I can't tell you that off the top of my head, but I'm sure that there will be evidence. jassa scott: There has been a shift in that there's been continued emphasis in post-16 education and training around literacy and picking that up. In apprenticeships they'll use essential skills and so on to try and get that basic level of literacy as well, so there is an emphasis. I think one of the worrying indications, maybe, that post-16 sectors find is that sometimes even when learners are coming out with a basic qualification in a GCSE, potentially in English or a literature subject, they don't necessarily have a really good foundation of some of the basic skills as well. Could I just move you on? Sorry meilyr rowlands: The only thing I would add to that is, I guess, it's quite small, the number of people who don't have basic reading. I think one of the things we need to emphasise is that learning reading is something you do throughout your life, and what we need to do is to develop, in particular, pupils' higher level reading skills. The fact that they can just read isn't the end of the story; they need to be developing those higher level reading skills and continuing to widen the range of things they read, and be able to develop their vocabulary at a higher level. meilyr rowlands: Absolutely, yesthose higher level skills of comprehension and inference and those sorts of things. Can I just move you on, then, to numeracy and whether you can tell us if you're satisfied with the progress in numeracy, because I think we were doing better on the PISA results in maths in Wales than we did previously? So, what are your thoughts on that? meilyr rowlands: I think there is a fairly clear good news story here. PISA shows improvements and a lot of that can be attributed, I think, to the new GCSE mathematics numeracy. I think there's much less predictability in that work; you can't approach it in a formulaic way, either the pupils or the teachers in terms of teaching it. It's about applying what you've learnt in the core mathematics lessons to new situations in subjects across the curriculum. I think that that GCSE numeracy has built on the work that's been done lower down on the national numeracy framework, which has the same philosophy of applying that mathematics knowledge in a problem-solving situation. My final question, Chair, is: in your view, to what extent is Wales on track to meet the target of 500 points in each of the domains in the 2020-1 cycle for PISA? meilyr rowlands: I think that that target is somewhat arbitrary, but assuming that we continue on this journey that we are onthe current change programme of the new curriculum and so forthI think we would expect to see those improvements we've seen in science and in mathematics to continue. The only other thing I would add is that there is some research that indicates or suggests that the effect of schools is greater on mathematics and science than on reading, and the reason for that is you don't do a lot mathematics or science in the home. But the attitude towards reading is very much dependent on family and community factors, more so, maybe, than mathematics and science. So, I think that's another reason why I think a community-school approach is really important. You need to get everybody on board; it's not just what the teacher does in the classroomit's important that the whole family and the community thinks that reading is important. dawn bowden am: Just on numeracy, it was interesting because one of the schools in my constituency have actually contacted my office and a number of other organisations across the constituency to ask us how we use maths in our work. So, they're obviously trying to relate that now to everyday life and working, which I thought was quite good. lynne neagle am: We've got some questions now around progress of specific groups of pupils. If I can start and ask you how concerning is it that the gap between pupils eligible for free school meals and other pupils has not narrowed in the last 10 years, especially given the 475 million pupil deprivation grant investment. I think secondary schools and the issue of poverty were the two things I've noted in the annual report. I think it is worth also remembering that compared to other countries, for example, in PISA, we do compare quite well in terms of equity. There's also an argument that maybe poverty and austerity have increased, so that we're in a way running to keep still. So, there are a lot of caveats to be made around the fact that that poverty gap hasn't closed, but that's not to say that schools can't do something about it, and I've suggested in the annual report a sort of a two-pronged approach. I think there is evidence in the international research that teaching and learning, better teaching and learning, helps disadvantaged poor pupils disproportionately. So, I think improving teaching and learning, and we discussed that earlier this morning about how the new curriculum is really all about improving the quality of teaching and learning in the classroom. So, that's one approach, and then the other approach, which I've also mentioned earlier, is having a community-focused approach to schools. It's very difficult for children to do well in school if they've got all kinds of things happening in their background. So, it's important that schools can maybe signpost those families to other services that can support them and help them. It's challenging for schools to go down this route, and I think the more help we can give schools to take that approach, the better. They have better engagement from parents, from the families, and that then reflects back on the work of the children. jassa scott: And we've just published a collection of good practice about how schools support vulnerable learners, and we'll be teasing out the aspects around community-focused schools a lot more in a report that we'll publish in the next couple of months. So, we've kind of drilled down and looked at what some schools are doing in that area in a bit more detail. Obviously, I think we've all been to schools where the PDG is actually used to engage parents more for exactly the reasons you say. But I just wanted to interrogate the deprivation gap a little bit, because, of course, even though, as you say, there's perhaps more equity in Wales, one of the reasons for that is because our children from better-off backgrounds do less well, and considerably less well than their peers in the other parts of the United Kingdom. So, whereas their attainment gaps are pretty dreadful, that's one of the reasonsthat our better-off children aren't doing as well as perhaps they might do. Is that a concern as well? We don't want this rush to the middle, do we? meilyr rowlands: I think it's essential that all groups of pupils do as well as they possibly can, absolutely. So, it's not quite the same issue, but we've talked about the importance of making sure that more able and talented children do well. meilyr rowlands: They're not the same, clearly, because you have more able and talented children from poor backgrounds. Differentiation is a challenge for schools,but it's absolutely essential that all groups of children do as well as they possibly can. So, in things like PISA, in terms of reading, for example, we can't just say it's that group that needs to improveall the groups need to improve. And I think that's why something like the new curriculum gives schools more scope to tailor their teaching and learning to the particular groups that they have, whether theyre more able, whether they're advantaged or whether they're disadvantaged. Pupils' confidence in their school's ability to help them with their emotional and mental well-being is much less at secondary school and that's been a consistent theme as well from your reports. As we mentioned earlier, we do pupil surveys before all our inspections, and across a number of those indicators, like, 'How well does the school listen? Do adults in school care about me? How well does the school deal with bullying?'quite a lot those ones around well-being do tail off. Nine out of 10 pupils at key stage 2 have that confidence, down to half at key stage 4, as you say. And I think there are a number of factors that we think contribute to that: I think one of the factors is that pupils face, sometimes, more challenges as they get older in those teenage years, but they also become more reflective and perhaps more discerning. And I think what we find in secondary schools is perhaps secondary school pupils notice sometimes the differences between their everyday life that they experience in school and perhaps the messages that they're getting about well-being in terms of their lessons, in terms of assemblies and in terms of school policies and so on. So, they are probably more discerning in noticing those differences and maybe there are some of those differences also there in primary school, but the pupils don't notice. I think we've already touched upon things like the differences in the way that, at primary school, you would tend to have a go-to adult, which is your teacher. The best secondary schools find ways to make sure that pupils do feel that level of support and feel there are trusted people, but it's more of a challenge to make sure that that happens, because of the way they're operating. We still have some concerns about personal and social education and the health and well-being support, which we've made a recommendation about in the past in some of our thematic reports, but also recently in some of our secondary school inspection reports. And I think I already touched upon the fact that sometimes, when the budget is tight, it can be some of thosethey're not peripheral in their importance, but they're not the teacher in the classroom: well-being support assistants and so on and family liaison workersstaff in the school who perhaps really support that pastoral care that the school as a whole can provideit may be that those are the roles that are less prevalent at times of less funding. So, I think there are some great members of staff doing a really good job, but perhaps they're not those members of staff who can support teachers and support pupils in creating that kind of caring environment. So, I think there's not an obvious answer and part of it is that they do become more discerning and perhaps more vocal in those responses generally, as they get older. And that might explain some of the difference with primary, where, generally, they're quite positive about everything across most of the schools that we ask. lynne neagle am: So, it's not that secondary schoolsbecause you've said that in a previous inspection reportare just not as good at prioritising mental health and well-being. jassa scott: I think there's an element that it's more of a challenge for a secondary school to provide an effective set of support from that whole-staff awareness of some of the challenges. And one of the pieces of work we've done recently is around adverse childhood experiences, and we have found that primary schools have taken that and embraced it. So, maybe not every member of staff has the same level of understanding, but also those staff aren't spending the same amount of time with pupils. So, in terms of getting to know pupils, picking up on signs that they may be struggling, or that there might be concernsit's much more of a challenge. You've got to work a lot harder as a secondary school to make sure that staff have that knowledge and that you've got the tracking systems that can put those different bits of information together to actually mean that you can target support where it's needed. Obviously, we've had one case in north Wales, in an independent school, where there were serious concerns. What's that done to your desire to monitor and check what's going on in these independent schools? Are they regulated sufficiently? jassa scott: I'll pick up on that as well. So, some have boarding provision, and where they have boarding provision, Care Inspectorate Wales would look at the boarding side of it, we'd look at the educational side of it. There are others where they may have a linked children's home, which can be another room in the same house, or it can be a number of miles away, and similarly there CIW would look at the residential aspects of the care and we'd look at the school. So, I think, there's a focus in the independent school standards regulations, which is a minimum that all schools have to meet to maintain a registration. There is a focus in that on how that school looks after and cares for its pupils, and there are focuses on that element of boarding provision where relevant, and the national minimum standards that the care inspectorate look at that have aspects around supporting well-being as well. What we do find in our inspections is that, overall, we generally find that pupils' well-being develops, they make good progress, and that care, support and guidance that schools give is good. What we mean by that, really, practically, is that they are developing their resilience and their self-esteem. In special schools, this might mean particularly that those pupils learn to manage their anxieties better so that they improve their behaviour, which may be one of the reasons why they're in that specialist setting. In mainstream independent schools, what we find is that people develop their tenacity, their curiosity for learningtheir resilience in that way. For example, there was one school where we found that they weren't making appropriate referrals to child and adolescent mental health services. So, these schools do operate independently by their nature, and their awareness, perhaps, of some of the guidance and support that is out theresometimes, maybe, there can be more to be done, and I think we've talked to Welsh Government about that. suzy davies am: What's Estyn's role in thatto bring that level of awareness to those schools? jassa scott: I think we do through our inspection guidance, and the independent school standards do refer to Welsh Government guidanceit's something like 'Keeping learners safe', which is a really key document, which supports safeguarding and caring across schools. So, I think the other area is that sometimes we don't have the intelligence about what. So, for example, if there's been a safeguarding referral from a school, we don't necessarily always get that information, which means that when we do go to inspect, we may not have the full picture to help us tailor our inspection activity. So, that's something we've raised lynne neagle am: [Inaudible.]be brief and brief in answers. Do you mind if I move on to the next question? lynne neagle am: We're going to have to skip those, I'm afraid, and talk to the last set of questions, just because of the time pressures. What role, if any, did Estyn have in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's latest review of progress in school improvement when they visited Wales in late 2019? meilyr rowlands: Well, we were interviewed. Therefore, the three of us had an interview with the OECD officials and we offered evidence to them. And I think that, when the report is published, you will see that the OECD does draw on our broader evidence and will be quoting our reportsthe annual report and some of our thematic reports. How significant a role do you believe the national evaluation and improvement resource will play in raising school standards? meilyr rowlands: I think that it's very important. It's Claire who has been specifically tasked with that, so I'll ask Claire to speak about it. claire morgan: I think working together with the practitioners, the regions and representatives from local authorities is a great opportunity to develop a national approach, because we know across Wales there's some excellent practice, but we know there are schools that struggle to bring about improvement. So, this national resource has the potential to provide schools with detailed guidance on how they can approach not only self-evaluation, but, more importantly, how they can bring about that improvement. Half of those have been involved in developing the tools and approaches right from the start, and 22 new schools have come on board this year. But we anticipate that there will be lots of tools and approaches within that resource that schools can use to improve the quality of self-evaluation throughout the school, primaries, secondaries, PRUs and special schools. But it will focus on establishing a culture within the school that focuses on improvement, that establishes a reflective culture where all staff are involved in development. So, we're hoping that this toolit's still currently in development, but we hope that that will support schools really well. And, with regard to comparison of performance, does the lack of comparative attainment data raise difficulties when you're inspecting and drawing conclusions and standards in schools? meilyr rowlands: Not really, no. I think there was a bit of a myth that a lot of this performance data was just for Estyn, but actually it never has been. We look at standards, we look at teaching and learning in the classroom, we look at well-being, we look at care support and guidance, we look at leadership, we look at all of these things, and we look at it based on first-hand evidencewhat we actually see in the classroom. So, we're quite happy to continue to inspect schools, and we in fact support having less emphasis on data because, although data is useful, and we hope that schools will continue to analyse their data and use that data to help them self-improve and self-evaluate, we don't actually need it and it has actually created a bit of a high-stakes culture. We've come to the end of our time, so can I thank you all for your attendance? As usual, you'll receive a transcript to check for accuracy following the meeting. Paper to note 1 is a ministerial update on the emotional and mental health of children and young people in Walesnext steps for 'Mind over matter'. Paper to note 2 is a letter from the Minister for Housing and Local Government regarding teachers' pay and pensions, and paper to note 3 is a letter to the Minister for Education from us regarding the school funding review. Can I then propose under Standing Order 17.42 that the committee resolves to meet in private for the remainder of the meeting? Are Members content? Great
grad b: Could I hit hit F - seven to do that ? on the Robert ? grad a: I 'm grad b: Oh , the remote will do it OK . grad b: Cuz I 'm already up there ? grad a: in control here . grad b: So , we were Ah ! grad c: Johno , where are you ? grad b: OK . grad c: Should you go back to the first one ? grad b: Do I wanna go back to the first one ? grad c: Well grad b: OK . grad d: I 'm sorry I grad c: Well , just to grad b: OK . It 's basically  talks about  It just refers to the fact that  one of main things we had to do was to decide what the intermediate sort of nodes were , grad d: I can read ! I 'm kidding . grad a: But if you really want to find out what it 's about you have to click on the little light bulb . grad b: Although I 've I 've never I don't know what the light bulb is for . grad a: Do you wanna try ? grad d: Ach u grad b: I 'd prefer not to . Is that the idea ? grad a: Why are you doing this in this mode and not in the presentation mode ? grad d: OK . grad b: Because I 'm gonna switch to the JavaBayes program grad a: Oh ! OK . grad b: You want me to Wait , what do you want me to do ? grad c: Can you maximize the window so all that stuff on the side isn't doesn't appear ? grad a: No , It 's OK . grad b: Well I can do that , but then I have to end the presentation in the middle so I can go back to open up grad c: OK , fine . grad b: So then the features we decided or we decided we were talked about , right ?  the the prosody , the discourse , verb choice . Whether the and this i we actually have a separate feature but I decided to put it on the same line for space . " Nice walls " which we can look up because  if you 're gonna get real close to a building in the Tango mode , right , there 's gotta be a reason for it . And it 's either because you 're in route to something else or you wanna look at the walls . The context , which in this case we 've limited to " business person " , " tourist " , or " unknown " , the time of day , and " open to suggestions " , isn't actually a feature . can I just ask the nice walls part of it is that  , in this particular domain you said be i it could be on two different lines but are you saying that in this particular domain it happens the that landmark - iness cor is correlated with grad b: Oh grad c: No . grad b: I either could put " nice walls " on its own line or " open to suggestions " off the slide . grad c: Like you could have a p grad d: And and By " nice " you mean grad c: You Like you could have a post office with  you know , nice murals or something . grad b: Or one time I was at this grad d: So " nice walls " is a stand in for like architecturally it ,  significant grad b: But see the thing is , if it 's grad c: Architecturally appealing from the outside . grad b: Yeah but if it 's architecturally significant you might be able to see it from Like you m might be able to " Vista " it , grad a:   grad b: Yeah , versus , like , I was at this place in Europe where they had little carvings of , like , dead people on the walls or something . grad b: But if you looked at it real close , you could see the the in intricacy of the of the walls . grad a: The grad d: Something you want to inspect at close range because it 's interesting . grad b: Robert ? grad a: Well there there is a term that 's often used . And I was just wondering whether that 's the same as what you describe as " landmark - iness " . There 's landmark for  , touristic reasons and landmark for I don't know navigational reasons or something . Tourist - y landmarks also happen to be Wouldn't couldn't they also be They 're not exclusive groups , are they ? Like non - tourist - y landmarks and grad a: Or it can be als grad b: direct navigational grad d: They 're not mutually exclusive ? grad b: Yeah . grad b: OK , So our initial idea was not very satisfying , because  our initial idea was basically all the features pointing to the output node . grad b: And  , so we Reasons being , you know , it 'd be a pain to set up all the probabilities for that . If we moved onto the next step and did learning of some sort ,  according Bhaskara we 'd be handicapped . grad c: Well usually , you know , N If you have N features , then it 's two to the N or exponential in N . So then our next idea was to add a middle layer , right ? So the thinking behind that was we have the features that we 've drawn from the communication of some Like , the someone s The person at the screen is trying to communicate some abstract idea , like " I 'm " the the abstract idea being " I am a tourist I want to go to this place . " Right ? So we 're gonna set up features along the lines of where they want to go and what they 've said previously and whatnot . Right ? but the middle thing , we were thinking along the lines of maybe trying to figure out , like , the concept of whether they 're a tourist or whether they 're running an errand or something like that along those lines . So then the hidden variables hair variables we came up with were whether someone was on a tour , running an errand , or whether they were in a hurry , because we were thinking  , if they were in a hurry there 'd be less likely to like or th grad c: Want to do Vista , grad b: Right . grad c: right ? Because if you want to view things you wouldn't be in a hurry . grad b: Or they might be more likely to be using the place that they want to go to as a like a navigational point to go to another place .  right now it 's still kind of in a toy version of it , because we didn't know the probabilities of or Well I 'll talk about it when I get the picture up . " Verb used " is actually personally amusing mainly because it 's it 's just whether the verb is a Tango verb , an Enter verb , or a Vista verb . grad c: Yeah , that one needs a lot of grad d: And are those mutually exclusive sets ? grad b: No . grad c: But  that would 've made the probably significantly be more complicated to enter , grad d: Got it . grad c: so we decided that for the purposes of this it 'd be simpler to just have three verbs .  Why don't you mention things about this , Bhaskara , that I am not that are not coming to my mind right now . grad c: OK , so Yeah , so note the four nodes down there , the sort of , the things that are not directly extracted . The " closed " is also not directly extracted I guess , from the  grad b: Well i it 's grad c:  . grad d: From the utterance ? grad b: it 's so it sort of is grad c: Actually , no , wait . grad b: because it 's because have the the time of day grad c: It is . grad c: Right , so f Right , but the other ones , the final destination , the whether they 're doing business , whether they 're in a hurry , and whether they 're tourists , that kind of thing is all  sort of you know probabilistically depends on the other things . So we haven't  , managed Like we don't have nodes for " discourse " and " parse " , although like in some sense they are parts of this belief - net . grad c: But  The idea is that we just extract those features from them , so we don't actually have a node for the entire parse , grad d:   grad d: So some of the the top row of things What 's what 's " Disc admission fee " ? grad c: whether they discuss the admission fees . So we looked at the data and in a lot of data people were saying things like " Can I get to this place ? " grad d: Oh . So that 's like a huge  clue that they 're trying to Enter the place rather than  to Tango or Vista , grad d:  - huh . grad b: There were there 'd be other things besides just the admission fee , but you know , we didn't have grad d:   So there are certain cues that are very strong either lexical or topic - based  , concept cues grad b: From the discourse that Yeah . And then in that second row or whatever that row of Time of Day through that So all of those Some of them come from the utterance and some of them are sort of either world knowledge or situational things . grad d: " Unmark @ @ Time of Day " grad c: Yeah , I m  grad a: Yeah . I would actually suggest we go through this one more time so we we all  , agree on what what the meaning of these things is at the moment and maybe what changes we grad b: Yeah , th OK . so one thing I I 'm you know unsure about , is how we have the discus  the " admission fee " thing set up . So one thing that we were thinking was by doing the layers like this ,  we kept  things from directly affecting the mode beyond the concept , but you could see perhaps discus the " admission fee " going directly to the mode pointing at " Enter " , grad a:   grad b: right ? Versus pointing to just at " tourist " , grad d:   grad b: But we just decided to keep all the things we extracted to point at the middle and then down . That 's because we 're talking about landmarks as touristic landmarks not as possible  grad b: Right . grad c: Disc - " admission fee " is a binary thing , " time of day " is like morning , afternoon , night . grad b: That 's how we have it currently set up , grad a: Yep . grad b: but it could be , you know , based upon hour grad c: Yeah . Normally context will include a huge amount of information , but  , we are just using the particular part of the context which consists of the switch that they flick to indicate whether they 're a tourist or not , I guess . grad c: So Right , grad d: Right ? grad c: so it 's not really all of context . Similarly prosody is not all of prosody but simply for our purposes whether or not they appear tense or relaxed . grad a: The the So the context is a switch between tourist or non - tourist ? grad c: and grad a: Or also unknown ? grad b: Or un unknown , grad a: OK . Unknown , right ? grad d: So final dest So it seems like that would really help you for doing business versus tourist , grad c: Which is th Which one ? grad d: but OK . so the the context being  , e I don't know if that question 's sort of in general , " are you "  the ar ar are do they allow business people to be doing non - business things at the moment ? grad c: Yeah , it does . So then you just have some probabilities over grad c: Everything is probablistic , and There 's always grad d: OK . " Verb used " is like , right now we only have three values , but in general they would be a probability distribution over all verbs . grad c:  " nice walls " is binary , " closed " is binary " final destination " , again Yeah , all those are binary I guess . grad c: Yeah , anything with a question mark after it in that picture is a binary node . Right ? grad c: Which things ? grad a: Nice walls ? grad b: Wi grad d:   grad b: It is binary but it doesn't have question mark because it 's extracted . grad a: So we can either be in a hurry or not , but we cannot be in a medium hurry at the moment ? grad c: Well , we To do that we would add another  value for that . grad c: And that would require s updating the probability distribution for " mode " as well . grad d: So  , of course this will happen when we think more about the kinds of verbs that are used in each cases grad a: Yeah , yeah . grad d: but you can imagine that it 's verb plus various other things that are also not in the bottom layer that would that would help you Like it 's a conjunction of , I don't know , you know , the verb used and some other stuff that that would determine grad c: Right . grad a: well the the sort of the landmark is is sort of the object right ? the argument in a sense ? grad d: Usually . I I don't know if that 's always the case I I guess haven't looked at the data as much as you guys have . grad a: that 's always warping on something some entity , grad d:   grad a: and   maybe at this stage we will we do want to  sort of get  modifiers in there grad b:  . grad a: because they may also tell us whether the person is in a hurry or not grad b: I want to get to the church quickly , grad c: Yeah . Do we have anything else to say about this ? grad c: We can do a little demo . grad a: No , then it wouldn't be a demo I was just gonna s grad c:  We can do a demo in the sense that we can  , just ob observe the fact that this will , in fact do inference . grad c: So we can , you know , set some of the  nodes and then try to find the probability of other nodes . grad c: just  I don't know , say they discussed the admission fee grad b: OK . grad c: and  the place has nice walls grad b: I love nice walls , OK ? I 'm a big fan . grad d: it 's starting to grow on me grad b: And the time of day is night ? grad c: Yeah , no wait . grad b: One thing that bugs me about JavaBayes is you have to click that and do this . grad c: So that is the probability that they 're Entering , Vista - ing or Tango - ing . grad c: And  grad d: So slightly biased toward " Tango " ing grad c: Yeah . grad b: If it 's night time , they have not discussed admission fee , and the n walls are nice . The reason I say the demo doesn't work very well is yesterday we  observed everything in favor of taking a tour , and it came up as " Tango " , right ? Over and over again . grad c: Like , we totally hand - tuned the probabilities , grad d: Yeah . We were like "  , well if the person does this and this and this , let 's say forty percent for this , grad d: OK . grad a: Yeah but it it grad d: Maybe the bias toward " Tango " ing was yours , then ? grad b: Yeah , grad c: Yeah . grad b: that 's that 's at grad c: It 's So we have to like fit the probabilities . grad d: So , the real case ? grad a: However you know , it The purpose was not really , at this stage , to come up with meaningful probabilities but to get thinking about that hidden middle layer . grad a: And grad b: We would actually I guess once we look at the data more we 'll get more hidden nodes , grad a:   grad b: No , I think we should have  exponentially more middle nodes than features we 've extracted . Whether you 're It 's whether It 's not grad d: And are th grad c: I think it 's more like " Are you are tourist ? are you in Ham - like Heidelberg for a " grad d: Oh , so , I thought that was directly given by the context switch . What if the context , which is not set , but still they say things like , " I want to go  , see the  the the castle and  , et cetera . " grad a: Is it grad b: Well the I kind of thought of " doing business " as more of running an errand type thing . grad a: So if you run out of cash as a tourist , and and and you need to go to the AT grad b: So i wi th grad d: OK . grad a: " How do I get to the bank ? " grad d: I see . grad c: And that 'll affect whether you want to enter or you if you kinda thing . grad c: Yeah , I think this context node is a bit of a I don't know , like in d  Do we wanna have Like it 's grad d: Are you assuming that or not ? Like is that to be  if that 's accurate then that would determine tourist node . grad c: If the context were to set one way or another , that like strongly   , says something about whether whether or not they 're tourists . grad c: So what 's interesting is when it 's not when it 's set to " unknown " . grad a: We - what set the they set the context to " unknown " ? grad d: OK . grad c: Right now we haven't observed it , so I guess it 's sort of averaging over all those three possibilities . grad a: And if we now do leave everything else as is the results should be the same , grad b: Oops . grad c: Well no , because we Th - the way we set the probabilities might not have Yeah , it 's it 's an it 's an issue , right ? Like grad a: Pretty much the same ? grad c: Yeah , it is . So the issue is that  in belief - nets , it 's not common to do what we did of like having , you know , a d bunch of values and then " unknown " as an actual value . What 's common is you just like don't observe the variable , grad d: Yeah . grad c: But  We didn't do this because we felt that there 'd I guess we were thinking in terms of a switch that actually grad b: We were thi Yeah , grad a:   grad b: We were th grad c: But  I don't know y what the right thing is to do for that . grad a: Why don't we Can we ,  How long would it take to to add another node on the observatory and , play around with it ? grad c: Another node on what ? grad b: well it depends on how many things it 's linked to . If we create something that for example would be  So th some things can be landmarks in your sense but they can never be entered ? So for example s a statue . grad a: So maybe we wanna have " landmark " meaning now " enterable landmark " versus ,  something that 's simply just a vista point , for example . grad a: Yeah ?  , a statue or  grad c: So basically it 's addressing a variable that 's " enterable or not " . grad b: Also you know , didn't we have a size as one ? The size of the landmark . grad c: What ? grad b: Cuz if it 's grad c:  . grad b: For some reason I had that OK , that was a thought that I had at one point but then went away . grad c: So you want to have a a node for like whether or not it can be entered ? grad a: Well , for example , if we include that , yeah ? grad c: Yeah . grad a: accessibility or something , yeah ? " Is it Can it be entered ? " grad c:  . In the sense that , you know , if it 's Tom the house of Tom Cruise , you know , it 's enterable but you may not enter it . grad a: Yeah ? and  And these are very observable sort of from the from the ontology sort of things . grad b: Way Does it actually help to distinguish between those two cases though ? Whether it 's practically speaking enterable , or actually physically enterable or not ? grad a: y y If If you 're running an errand you maybe more likely to be able to enter places that are usually not al w you 're not usually not allowed to  m grad d: It seems like it would for  ,  determining whether they wanna go into it or not . grad b: Well I can see why grad d: Cuz they grad a: Let 's get this  b clearer . grad b: Whether it 's a Whether it 's a public building , and whether it 's actually has a door . grad a: This is sort of  grad b: So Tom Cruise 's house is not a public building grad d:   grad b: OK , sh explain to me why it 's necessary to distinguish between whether something has a door and is not public . Or , if something It seems like it 's equivalent to say that it doesn't have a door a and it grad a:   grad b: Or " not public " and " not a door " are equivalent things , grad a: Yeah . So we would have What does it mean , then , that we have to we have an object type statue . grad a: And then we have , for example , an object type , that 's a hotel . It 's the hotel Zum Ritter , which is the only Renaissance building in Heidelberg that was left after the big destruction and for the Thirty Years War , blah - blah - blah .  - And lots of detail , c and carvings , engravings and so forth , grad b: Excellent . So I guess your question is so far I have no really arg no real argument why to differentiate between statues as statues and houses of celebrities , from that point of view . Let Let 's do a Can we add , just so I can see how it 's done , a " has door " property or ? grad b: OK . grad c: What would it , connect to ? Like , what would , it affect ? grad a: I think , it might affect Oh actually it 's it it wouldn't affect any of our nodes , right ? grad c: What I was thinking was if you had a like grad a: Oh it 's it affects th The " doing business " is certainly not . grad b: You could affect Theoretically you could affect " doing business " with " has door " . grad a: right ? grad c: Yeah , I don't know if JavaBayes is nice about that . It might be that if you add a new thing pointing to a variable , you just like it just overwrites everything . Whew ! grad c: Well that 's fine , but we have to see the function now . grad b: This grad c: What would be nice if it is if it just like kept the old function for either value but . grad b: Oh wait , it might be Did we w Yes , that 's not good . grad a: Maybe you can read in ? grad c: Ha - So have you used JavaBayes a lot ? grad d: Yes . Really I ha I 've I haven't used it a lot and I haven't used it in the last you know many months so grad c: OK . grad c: Like , we looked at sort of  a page that had like a bunch of grad d: Yeah . grad c:  in a way this is a lot of good features in Java it 's cra has a GUI and it 's  grad d:   grad c: What ? grad b: Maybe it did a little bit of learning , grad c: OK . grad a: What is the c code ? Can w can we see that ? How do you write the code grad b: The c grad a: or do you actually never have to write any code there ? grad c: Yeah . grad b: Oh man , grad c: Like , there 's the grad b: I didn't n Is there an ampersand in DOS ? grad c: Nope . grad c: It 'll ask you what you what it wants what you want to open it with and see what BAT , I guess . grad c: That 's Oh ! grad b: Maybe it was just grad a: Oh . grad b: I like I like Word Pad because it has the  the returns , grad a: Wordpad ? I grad b: the carriage returns on some of them . grad b: You know how they get " auto - fills " I guess , grad a: Mmm  grad b: It just basically looks like it just specifies a bunch of grad a:   grad b: It just that it 's grad c: But they 're not very friendly . grad b: Yeah the ordering isn't very clear on grad c: So you 'd have to like figure out Like you have to go and grad d: Right . grad c: it 's not grad b: We were doing it grad c: Yeah we can maybe write an interface th for  entering probability distributions easily , something like like a little script . I actually seem to recall Srini complaining about something to do with Entering probability so this is probably grad c: The other thing is it is in Java grad d: Yeah , it 's Yeah . grad b: Or grad a: Do you have the true source files or just the class ? grad b: I don't know if he actually grad c: Yeah . we do grad b: Does he grad c: I I saw directory called " source " , grad b: Oh . grad c: I think it might it might be simpler to just have a script that , you know It 's , like , friendly , grad d: The d the data tables . grad a: But if th if there is an XML file that or format that it can also read  it just reads this , right ? When it starts . grad b: Yeah I know there is an I was looking on the we web page and he 's updated it for an XML version of I guess Bayes - nets . grad c: The JavaBayes guy ? So but , e he doesn't use it . So in what sense has he updated it ? grad b: Well th you can either you ca or you can read both . grad b: Because  Well at least the  I could have misread the web page , I have a habit of doing that , but . grad a: So you got more slides ? grad b: Do I have more slides ?  yes , one more . E That 's maybe , I don't know If grad b:  that 's future future work . grad b: And of course if you have a presentation that doesn't have something that doesn't work at all , then you have " What I learned " , as a slide . grad b: I know what I like about these meetings is one person will nod , and then the next person will nod , and then it just goes all the way around the room . So this means  grad b: Should I pull up the net again ? grad d: Yeah . grad d: So a more general thing than " discussed admission fee "  , could be I I 'm just wondering whether the context , the background context of the discourse might be I don't know , if there 's a way to define it or maybe you know generalize it some way  , there might be other cues that , say , in the last few utterances there has been something that has strongly associated with say one of the particular modes  , I don't know if that might be grad a:   I think we grad d: and and into that node would be various various things that that could have specifically come up . grad a: I think a a sort of general strategy here You know , this is this is excellent because  it gets you thinking along these terms is that maybe we ob we could observe a couple of  discourse phenomena such as the admission fee , and something else and something else , that happened in the discourse before . And maybe there are two  So maybe this could be sort of a separate region of the net , which has two has it 's own middle layer . Maybe this , you know , has some kind of  , funky thing that di if this and this may influence these hidden nodes of the discourse which is maybe something that is  , a more general version of the actual phenomenon that you can observe . So things that point towards grad b: So instead of single node , for like , if they said the word " admission fee " grad d: Exactly . grad b: " admission fee " , or maybe , you know , " how much to enter " grad d: Yeah . Yeah ? And then maybe there are some discourse acts if they happened before ,  it 's more for  a cue that the person actually wants to get somewhere else and that you are in a in a in a route  , sort of proceeding past these things , so this would be just something that where you want to pass it .  ? Is that it ? However these are of course then the the nodes , the observed nodes , for your middle layer . So this again points to " final destination " , " doing business " , " tourist hurry " and so forth . we have a whole region " in a e grad d: That 's a whole set of discourse related cues to your middle layer . grad d: Right ? grad a: So e because at the end the more we  add , you know , the more spider - web - ish it 's going to become in the middle and the more of hand editing . They ra may have there own hidden layer that points to some of the the real hidden layer ,  or the general hidden layer . grad a: And the same we will be able to do for syntactic information , the verbs used , the object types used , modifiers . grad b: One thing that 's kind of been bugging me when I more I look at this is that the I guess , the fact that the there 's a complete separation between the observed features and in the output . grad b: For instance if the discourse does grad d: What do you mean by that ? grad b: well for instance , the " discourse admission fee " node seems like it should point directly to the grad d:  - huh . grad b: or increase the probability of " enter directly " versus " going there via tourist " . Like we could add a node like do they want to enter it , which is affected by admission fee and by whether it 's closed and by whether it has a door . And if it if you do it If you could connect it too hard you may get such phenomenon that like " So how much has it cost to enter ? " and the answer is two hundred fifty dollars , and then the persons says  " Yeah I want to see it . " Yeah ? meaning " It 's way out of my budget "  grad b: There are places in Germany where it costs two hundred fifty dollars to enter ? grad a: nothing comes to mind . But i you know , i we can Something Somebody can have discussed the admission fee and u the answer is s if we  , you know ,  still , based on that result is never going to enter that building . So the discourse refers to " admission fee " but it just turns out that they change their mind in the middle of the discourse . you have to have some notion of not just  there 's a there 's change across several turns of discourse grad b: Right . grad d: so I don't know how if any of this was discussed but how i if it all this is going to interact with whatever general  , other other discourse processing that might be happen . grad b: What sort of discourse processing is  are the How much is built into SmartKom and grad a: It works like this . The first thing we get is that already the intention is sort of t They tried to figure out the intention , right ? simply by parsing it . And this  m won't differentiate between all modes , yeah ? but at least it 'll tell us " OK here we have something that somebody that wants to go someplace , now it 's up for us to figure out what kind of going there is is is happening , and  , if the discourse takes a couple of turns before everything all the information is needed , what happens is you know the parser parses it and then it 's handed on to the discourse history which is ,  o one of the most elaborate elaborate modules . It 's it 's actually the the whole memory of the entire system , that knows what wh who said what , which was what was presented . It helps an an anaphora resolution and it and it fills in all the structures that are omitted , so , because you say " OK , how can I get to the castle ? " Oh , how how much is it ? " and  " yeah I would like   to g let 's do it " and so forth . So even without an a ana anaphora somebody has to make sure that information we had earlier on is still here . so whenever the  ,  person is not actually rejecting what happened before , so as in " No I really don't want to see that movie . I 'd rather stay home and watch TV "  What movie was selected in what cinema in what town is is going to be sort of added into the disc into the representations every di at each dialogue step , by the discourse model discourse model , Yeah , that 's what it 's called . and , it does some help in the anaphora resolution and it also helps in coordinating the gesture screen issues . So a person pointing to something on the screen , you know , the discourse model actually stores what was presented at what location on the s on the screen grad b:  . grad a: so it 's a it 's a rather huge huge thing but   we can sort of It has a very clear interface . We can query it whether admission fees were discussed in the last turn and and the turn before that or you know how deep we want to search grad b: OK . How deep do we want to sear , you know ?  but we should try to keep in mind that , you know , we 're doing this sort of for research , so we we should find a limit that 's reasonable and not go , you know , all the way back to Adam and Eve . You know , did that person ever discuss admissions fee fees in his entire life ? And the dialogues are pretty pretty you know concise and Anyway . grad d: So one thing that might be helpful which is implicit in the use of " admission fee discussion " as a cue for entry , is thinking about the plans that various people might have . This person is  , finding out information about this thing in order to go in as a tourist or finding out how to get to this place in order to do business .  , because then anything that 's a cue for one of the steps would be slight evidence for that overall plan . They 're in in non in sort of more traditional AI kinds of plan recognition things you sort of have you know , some idea at each turn of agent doing something , " OK , wha what plans is this a consistent with ? " and then get s some more information and then you see " here 's a sequence that this sort of roughly fits into " . grad d: I I don't know how you know you 'd have to figure out what knowl what knowledge representation would work for that . grad a: You know ? and it it 's fifty steps , grad d:   grad a: huh ? just for buying a ticket at a ticket counter , you know , and and maybe that 's helpful to look at it to look at those . W when we talked  we had the example , you know , of you being  a s a person on a ticket counter working at railway station and somebody r runs up to you with a suitcase in his hands , says New York and you say Track seven , huh ? And it 's because you know that that person actually is following , you know You execute a whole plan of going through a hundred and fifty steps , you know , without any information other than " New York " , huh ? inferring everything from the context .  , even though there is probably no train from here to New York , right ? grad d: Mmm . Right ? Is that t San Francisco , Chicago ? grad b: I think grad a: Is that possible ? grad b: One time I saw a report on trains , and I think there is a l I don't know if I thought there was a line that went from somewhere , maybe it was Sacramento to Chicago , grad a:   grad d: The Transcontinental Railroad , doesn't that ring a bell ? grad b: Yeah but I don't know if it 's still grad d: I think it has to exist somewhere . grad a: Well it never went all the way , right ?  you always had to change trains at Omaha , grad d: Well most of the way . grad a: right ? One track ended there and the other one started at five meters away from that grad d:  . grad a: yeah ? Has anybody ever been on an Amtrak ? grad d: I have . grad c: What ? Why ? grad b: I just They seem to have a lot of accidents on the Amtrak . grad a: But you know , I don't know whether it 's which ones are safer , you know , statistically . Yeah , they 're Yeah , it 's way better grad a: yeah I used  Amtrak quite a bit on the east coast and I was surprised . grad a:  ? grad c: I I want to see what it does with  " landmark - iness " . grad d: So by the way tha that structure that Robert drew on the board was like more  , cue - type - based , right , here 's like we 're gonna segment off a bit of stuff that comes from discourse and then some of the things we 're talking about here are more you know , we mentioned maybe if they talk about  , I don't know , entering or som you know like they might be more task - based . grad d: So I I don't know if there There 's obviously some m more than one way of organizing the variables into something grad a: I think that  What you guys did is really nicely sketching out different tasks , and maybe some of their conditions . grad a: One task is more likely you 're in a hurry when you do that kind of s doing business , grad d:   grad a: and and less in a hurry when  you 're a tourist  tourists may have never have final destinations , you know because they are eternally traveling around so maybe what what what happened what might happen is that we do get this sort of task - based middle layer , grad d:   grad a: and then we 'll get these sub - middle layers , that are more cue - based . So ,  I suggest w to for to proceed with this in in the sense that maybe throughout this week the three of us will will talk some more about maybe segmenting off different regions , and we make up some some toy a observable " nodes " is that what th grad b: Refined y re just refine the grad a: What 's the technical term ? grad c: OK . For which ? grad a: For the  nodes that are observable ? The " outer layer " ? grad c: Just observable nodes , grad b: The features , grad c: evidence nodes ? grad b: I don't know , whatever you grad a: Feature ma make up some features for those Identify four regions , grad c: Yeah . grad a: maybe make up some features for each region and  and  ,  and  middle layer for those . And then these should then connect somehow to the more plan - based deep space grad c: Yeah . grad c: Yeah , this is totally like The probabilities and all are completely ad - hoc .  but , they 're even like  like , close to the end we were like , you know we were like  really ad - hoc . grad c: Right ? Cuz if it 's like ,  If it 's four things coming in , right ? And , say , some of them have like three possibilities and all that . So you 're thinking like like a hundred and forty four or something possible things numbers to enter , grad d: And That 's terrible . grad b: Some of them are completely absurd too , like they want to enter , but it 's closed , grad d: That 's  Well grad b: it 's night time , you know there are tourists and all this weird stuff happens at the line up and you 're like grad c: Yeah , the only like possible interpretation is that they are like come here just to rob the museum or something to that effect . grad d: In which case you 're supposed to alert the authorities , and see appropriate action . Yeah , another thing to do , is also to ,  I guess to ask around people about other Bayes - net packages . grad d: Sorry , Wednesday , grad b: Who 's talking on Wednesday ? grad c: Maybe we can ask him about it . grad b: I haven't J Jerry never sent out a sent out an email , did he , ever ? grad c: No . grad d: Ben ? grad a: Ben , then , grad d: I think it 's Ben actually , grad a: Ben . I actually  , have  , also we can  , start looking at the SmartKom tables and I will grad b: Right . grad b: Do you want to trade ? grad a: no I I actually made a mistake because it it fell asleep and when Linux falls asleep on my machine it 's it doesn't wake up ever , so I had to reboot grad d: Oh , no . grad a: And if I reboot without a network , I will not be able to start SmartKom , because I need to have a network . grad b:  grad a: So we 'll do that t maybe  grad c: But . But once you start sart start SmartKom you can be on You don't have to be on a network anymore . grad b: Why does SmartKom need a network ? grad a:  it looks up some stuff that , you know , is is that is in the written by the operating system only if it if you get a DHCP request , so it you know , my computer does not know its IP address , you know ? grad b: Ah . grad a: And I don't have an IP address , they can't look up they don't know who localhost is , and so forth and so forth . grad a: She 's willing to do it , meaning be the wizard for the data collection , also maybe transcribe a little bit , if she has to , but also recruiting subjects , organizing them , and so forth . Jerry however suggested that we should  have a trial run with her , see whether she can actually do all the  spontaneous , eloquent and creativeness that we  expect of the wizard . And I talked to Liz about this and it looks as if Friday afternoon will be the time when we have a first trial run for the data . grad c: So who would be the subject of this trial run ? grad a: Pardon me ? grad c: Who Will there be a Is one Is you one of you gonna be the subject ? Like are you grad a:  Liz also volunteered to be the first subject , which I think might be even better than us guys . grad a: If we do need her for the technical stuff , then of course one of you has to sort of  jump in . grad c: Well I just figured it has to be someone who 's , familiar enough with the data to cause problems for the wizard , so we can , see if they 're you know good .  that 's what we wanna check , right ? grad a: grad d: Well , in this case it 's a p it 's a sort of testing of the wizard rather than of the subject . grad c: Isn't that what it is ? grad d: It 's  grad a: yes w we we would like to test the wizard , but you know , if we take a subject that is completely unfamiliar with the task , or any of the set up , we get a more realistic grad c: I guess that would be reasonable . grad d: I 'm sure if we  , You think there 's a chance we might need Liz for , whatever , the technical side of things ? I 'm sure we can get other people around who don't know anything  , if we want another subject . So , is it a experimental setup for the  , data collection totally ready determined ? grad b: I like that . grad a:  I think it 's it 's it 's  experimental setup u on the technical issue yes , except we st I think we still need  a recording device for the wizard , just a tape recorder that 's running in a room . grad a: But  in terms of specifying the scenario ,    we 've gotten a little further grad d:   grad a: but  we wanted to wait until we know who is the wizard , and have the wizard partake in the ultimate sort of definition probe . So so if if on Friday it turns out that she really likes it and and we really like her , then nothing should stop us from sitting down next week and getting all the details completely figured out . So the ideal task  , will have whatever I don't know how much the structure of the evolving Bayes - net will af affect Like we wanna we wanna be able to collect as much of the variables that are needed for that , grad a: Mmm - yea - some . grad d: right ? in the course of the task ? Well not all of them but you know . grad a: Bu - e e e I 'm even This this Tango , Enter , Vista is sort of , itself , an ad - hoc scenario . So we wanted just to collect data , to get that that that elicits more , that elicits richer language . grad a: And we actually did not want to constrain it too much , grad d:   And then maybe we 'll discover the phenomenon the phenomena that we want to solve , you know , with whatever engine we we come up with . So this this this is a parallel track , you know , there they hopefully meet , grad d: OK . grad a: but since grad d: It could it could be used for not just this task . grad a: It should tell us , you know , what kind of phenomenon could occur , it should tell us also maybe something about the difference between people who think they speak to a computer versus people who think they speak to a human being grad d:   So it may get us some more information on the human - machine pragmatics , that no one knows anything about , as of yesterday . And secondly , now that of course we have sort of started to lick blood with this , and especially since  Johno can't stop Tango - ing , we may actually include , you know , those those intentions . So now I think we should maybe have at least one navigational task with with sort of explicit  grad d:   grad a: not ex it 's implicit that the person wants to enter , grad d:   grad a: and maybe some task where it 's more or less explicit that the person wants to take a picture , grad d:   grad a: Whereas , you know , if we 'd just get data we 'd never know what they actually wanted , we 'd get no cues . grad b: So is this the official end of the meeting now ? grad c: Yep . grad c: So what 's " Economics , the fallacy " ? grad a: Ma grad b: I just randomly label things . grad c: Oh , really ? grad a: Maybe we ought to switch off these things before we continue
grad e: I think it 's actually phd d: What is what is that ? grad e: it depends on if the temp files are there or not , that at least that 's my current working hypothesis , phd d: Ah . grad e: that I think what happens is it tries to clear the temp files and if they 're too big , it crashes . phd b: When the power went out the other day and I restarted it , it crashed the first time . grad e: no , it doesn't it doesn't clear those necessarily , phd d: Oh wait It it doesn't clear them , OK . grad e: It 's i they 're called temp files , but they 're not actually in the temp directory they 're in the scratch , so . phd d: But that 's usually the meeting that I recorded , and it neve it doesn't crash on me . phd b: Well this wasn't Actually , this wasn't a before your meeting , this was , Tuesday afternoon when , Robert just wanted to do a little recording , grad e: Oh well . professor c: I don't know when would be a good excuse for it , but I just can't wait to be giving a talk t and and and use the example from last week with everybody t doing the digits at once . You know ? You wanted to pe keep people from listening in , you could like have that playing outside the room . Everybody give the reports about what they were doing at exactly the same time , phd d: And we 'll just all leave , phd b: And then we 'll we 'll go back later and review the individual channels , professor c: yeah . phd b: If you wanna know what professor c: Actually isn't that what we have been doing ? phd d: Yeah . professor c: What are we doing ? grad e: I Since I 've been gone all week , I didn't send out a reminder for an agenda , so . professor c: Yeah , and I 'm just grad e: Do we have anything to talk about or should we just read digits and go ? phd b: I wouldn't mind hearing how the conference was . professor c: What conference ? phd d: I had one question about grad e: Yeah , really . The next , phd d: Next weekend ? grad e: Next weekend , week from phd f: right ? professor c: That is right . phd d: Sorry , not not not the days coming up , but phd f: It 's like the grad e: A week from Saturday . phd d: So , are we do we have like an agenda or anything that we should be professor c: No , but that would be a good idea . professor c: Why don't we w phd f: So so the deal is that I can , I can be available after , like ten thirty or something . I don't know how s how early you wanted to professor c: They 're not even gonna be here until eleven or so . grad e: Eurospeech is due on Friday and then I 'm going down to San  , San Jose Friday night , so , if you know , if we start nice and late Saturday that 's a good thing . grad e: They 're flying from somewhere to somewhere , professor c: Yeah , and they 'll end up here . professor c: So , i I I will be  , he 's taking a very early flight phd f: Oh . professor c: and we do have the time work difference running the right way , but I still think that there 's no way we could start before eleven . grad e: But , yeah maybe an agenda , or at least some things to talk about would be a good idea . professor c: Well we can start gathering those those ideas , but then we we should firm it up by next next Thursday 's meeting . postdoc a: Will we have time to , to prepare something that we in the format we were planning for the IBM transcribers by then , or ? grad e: Oh yeah . grad e: So have you heard back from Brian about that , Chuck ? phd b: Yes , he 's I I 'm sorry , I should have forwarded that along .  , oh I I think I mentioned at the last meeting , he said that , he talked to them and it was fine with the beeps they would be That 's easy for them to do . So , oh , though Thi - Thilo isn't here , but , I I have the program to insert the beeps . What I don't have is something to parse the output of the channelized transcripts to find out where to put the beeps , but that should be really easy to do . So do we have a meeting that that 's been done with , postdoc a: He 's he 's grad e: that we 've tightened it up to the point where we can actually give it to IBM and have them try it out ? postdoc a: He generated , a channel - wise presegmented version of a meeting , but it was Robustness rather than EDU so I guess depends on whether we 're willing to use Robustness ? phd b: Well for this experiment I think we can use pre pretty much anything . phd b: This experiment of just grad e: Well we had we had talked about doing maybe EDU as a good choice , though . phd b: Well we 've talked about that as being the next ones we wanted to transcribe . phd b: But for the purpose of sending him a sample one to f grad e: Yeah , maybe it doesn't matter . phd b: I I don't think it matte postdoc a: I 'll I 'll I 'll , get make that available . grad e: OK , and has it been corrected ? postdoc a: Oh , well , wait .  grad e: Hand - checked ? Cuz that was one of the processes we were talking about as well . phd b: Right , so we need to run Thilo 's thing on it , postdoc a: That 's right . postdoc a: I think they 're coming phd b: And we probably don't have to do necessarily a whole meeting for that if we just wanna send them a sample to try . What would be a good number of minutes ? phd b: I don't know , maybe we can figure out how long it 'll take @ @ to to do . grad e: I don't know , it seems to me w we probably should go ahead and do a whole meeting because we 'll have to transcribe the whole meeting anyway sometime . professor c: Yes except that if they had if there was a choice between having fifteen minutes that was fully the way you wanted it , and having a whole meeting that didn't get at what you wanted for them It 's just dependent of how much grad e: Like I  I guess if we have to do it again anyway , but ,  professor c: Yeah . phd b: I guess , the only thing I 'm not sure about is , how quickly can the transcribers scan over and fix the boundaries , postdoc a:   phd b: and  , is it pretty easy ? grad e: I think it 's gonna be one or two times real time at Wow , excuse me , two or more times real time , right ? Cuz they have to at least listen to it . professor c: Can we pipeline it so that say there 's , the transcriber gets done with a quarter of the meeting and then we you run it through this other other stuff ?  , grad e: Well the other stuff is I B I 'm just thinking that from a data keeping - track - of - the - data point of view , it may be best to send them whole meetings at a time and not try to send them bits and pieces . So the first thing is the automatic thing , and then it 's then it 's then it 's the transcribers tightening stuff up , grad e: Right . professor c: OK , so you might as well ha run the automatic thing over the entire meeting , and then and then , you would give IBM whatever was fixed . postdoc a: And have them fix it over the entire meeting too ? grad e: Right . professor c: Well , yeah , but start from the beginning and go to the end , right ? So if they were only half way through then that 's what you 'd give IBM . The I guess the question on my mind is do we wait for the transcribers to adjust the marks for the whole meeting before we give anything to IBM , or do we go ahead and send them a sample ? Let their professor c: Why wouldn't we s @ @ w i if they were going sequentially through it , why wouldn't we give them  i are we trying to get something done by the time Brian comes ? phd b: Well I I  , I don't know . professor c: So if we if we were , then it seems like giving them something , whatever they had gotten up to , would be better than nothing . grad e: Well , I don't think  , h they they typically work for what , four hours , something like that ? postdoc a: I gue  . grad e: I think the they should be able to get through a whole meeting in one sitting . I would think , unless it 's a lot harder than we think it is , which it could be , certainly . postdoc a: If it 's got like for speakers then I guess  if phd b: We 're just doing the individual channels , grad e: Or seven or eight . phd b: So it 's gonna be , depending on the number of people in the meeting , postdoc a: I guess there is this issue of , you know , if if the segmenter thought there was no speech on on a particular stretch , on a particular channel , grad e: Well postdoc a: and there really was , then , if it didn't show up in a mixed signal to verify , then it might be overlooked , so , the question is " should should a transcriber listen to the entire thing or can it g can it be based on the mixed signal ? " And I th eh so far as I 'm concerned it 's fine to base it on the mixed signal at this point , and grad e: That 's what it seems to me too , in that if they need to , just like in the other cases , they can listen to the individual , if they need to . postdoc a: What what aspect ? professor c: So you 're talking about tightening up time boundaries ? phd b: Yeah . professor c: So how do you grad e: So , they have the normal channeltrans interface where they have each individual speaker has their own line , phd b: Yeah . grad e: but you 're listening to the mixed signal and you 're tightening the boundaries , correcting the boundaries . grad e: Right , so so you 'll have to I phd d: It will miss them . It will it will miss grad e:  - huh ! phd d: Yeah , you have to say "  - huh " more slowly to to get c grad e: Sorry . phd d: So it will miss stuff like that which phd b: I grad e: Well , so so that 's something that the transcribers will have to have to do . postdoc a: Yeah , but presumably , most of those they should be able to hear from the mixed signal unless they 're embedded in the heavil heavy overlap section when in which case they 'd be listening to the channels anyway . phd b: That 's that 's what I 'm I 'm concerned about the part . phd b: Can't we  couldn't we just have , I don't know , maybe this just doesn't fit with the software , but I guess if I didn't know anything about Transcriber and I was gonna make something to let them adjust boundaries , I would just show them one channel at a time , with the marks , and let them adju postdoc a: Oh they can grad e: Well , but then they have to do but then they for this meeting they would have to do seven times real time , and it would probably be more than that . grad e: Right ? Because they 'd have to at least listen to each channel all the way through . postdoc a: And if phd b: But i but it 's very quick , postdoc a:  - huh . postdoc a: w Well , the other problem is the breaths grad e: I just don't think postdoc a: cuz you also see the breaths on the waveform . I 've I 've looked at the int  , s I 've tried to do that with a single channel , and and you do see all sorts of other stuff besides just the voice . grad e: Yeah , and I I think that they 're going much more on acoustics than they are on visuals . postdoc a: What you the digital what the digital task that you had your interface ?  , I know for a fact that one of those sh she could really well she could judge what th what the number was based on the on the waveform . Yeah , I found the same thing that when I was scanning through the wave form I could see when someone started to read digits just by the shapes . professor c: So I don't I 'm I 'm now entirely confused about what they do . grad e: But professor c: So , they 're they 're looking at a mixed signal , or they 're looking what what are they looking at visually ? postdoc a: Well , they have a choice . But I 've I 've tried looking at the single signal and and in order to judge when it when it was speech and when it wasn't , grad e: Oh . postdoc a: but the problem is then you have breaths which which show up on the signal . professor c: But the procedure that you 're imagining , people vary from this , is that they have the mixed signal wave form in front of them , postdoc a: Yes . professor c: and they have multiple , well , let 's see , there isn't we don't have transcription yet . So but there 's markers of some sort that have been happening automatically , postdoc a: Yes . professor c: and those show up on the mixed signal ? postdoc a: Oh , professor c: There 's a @ @ clicks ? grad e: N the t postdoc a: they show up on the separate ribbons . postdoc a: and and i i it 'll be because it 's being segmented as channel at a time with his with Thilo 's new procedure , then you don't have the correspondence of the times across the bins  across the ribbons  you could have professor c: And is there a line moving across the waveform as it goes ? grad e: Yes . professor c: OK , so The way you 're imaging is they kind of play it , and they see oh this happened , then this happened , then and if it 's about right , they just sort of let it slide , postdoc a: Yeah . professor c: and if it if it there 's a question on something , they stop and maybe look at the individual wave form . professor c: They they might look at it , right ? grad e: Well , the problem is that the the interface doesn't really allow you to switch visuals . grad e: The problem is that that the Tcl - TK interface with the visuals , it 's very slow to load waveforms . grad e: And so when I tried that that was the first thing I tried when I first started it , postdoc a: Oh , oh . You can you can switch quickly between the audio , grad e: right ? postdoc a: but you just can't get the visual display to show quickly . So you have to It takes , I don't know , three , four minutes to Well , it takes it takes long enough phd d: Yeah , it 's very slow to do that . postdoc a: It takes long enough cuz it has to reload the I I don't know exactly what it 's doing frankly cuz but it t it takes long enough that it 's just not a practical alternative . phd d: That w grad e: Well it it does some sort of shape pre - computation so that it can then scroll it quickly , grad g: But you can cancel that . grad g: Oh , really ? postdoc a: Now you could set up multiple windows , each one with a different signal showing , and then look between the windows . grad e: we we could do different interfaces , grad g: What if you preload them all ? grad e: right ?  , so so we could use like X Waves instead of Transcriber , postdoc a: Yeah . grad g: What if you were to preload all the channels or or initially grad e: Well that 's what I tried originally . grad g: like doesn't grad e: So I I actually before , Dave Gelbart did this , I did an interface which showed each waveform and ea a ribbon for each waveform , grad g:   grad e: but the problem with it is even with just three waveforms it was just painfully slow to scroll . So you just scroll a screen and it would , you know go " kur - chunk ! " grad g: Oh , OK . postdoc a: You know , I am thinking if we have a meeting with only four speakers and , you know , you could fire up a Transcriber interface for , y you know , in different windows , multiple ones , one for each channel . And it 's sort of a a hack but  it would be one way of seeing the visual form . grad e: I think that if we decide that we need that they need to see the visuals , we need to change the interface so that they can do that . professor c: So phd d: That 's actually what I thought of , loading the chopped up waveforms , you know , that that would make it faster grad e: An But isn't grad g:  . phd b: The problem is if if anything 's cut off , you can't expand it from the chopped up phd d: So . phd d: Right , but if you a at some point grad e: And wouldn't that be the same as the mixed signal ? phd d: No ,  the individual channels that were chopped up that it 'd be nice to be able to go back and forth between those short segments . phd d: Cuz you don't really nee like nine tenths of the time you 're throwing most of them out , but what you need are tho that particular channel , or that particular location , grad e: Yeah . phd d: might be nice , cuz we save those out already , to be able to do that . But it won't work for IBM of course , it only works here cuz they 're not saving out the individual channels . postdoc a: Well , I I do think that this this will be a doable procedure , professor c: Yeah . postdoc a: and , then when they get into overlaps , just have them systematically check all the channels to be sure that there isn't something hidden from from audio view . Yeah , hopefully ,  The mixed signal , the overlaps are pretty audible because it is volume equalized . The only problem is is , you know , counting how many and if they 're really correct or not . phd d: I don't know that you can locate them very well from the mixed signal , grad e: Right but but once once you know that they happen , you can at least listen to the close talking , phd d: but you would know that they were there , and then you would switch . professor c: But right now , to do this limitation , the switching is going to be switching of the audio ? Is what she 's saying . professor c: So grad e: Right , so so professor c: so they 're using their ears to do these markings anyway . grad e: did Dave Did Dave do that change where you can actually just click rather than having to go up to the menu to listen to the individual channels ? postdoc a: Yes . postdoc a: I 'm not sure what click what click on the ribbon ? Yeah , you can get that grad e: Yeah . postdoc a: oh , oh , get you can get the ,  you can get it to switch audio ?  , not last I tried , grad e: Yeah . grad e: We should get him to do that because , I think that would be much , much faster than going to the menu . There 's a reason I disagree , and that is that , you it 's very good to have a dissociation between the visual and the audio . There 're times when I wanna hear the mixed signal , bu but I want to transcribe on the single channel . postdoc a: Maybe , I just don't I don't see that it 's a grad e: Just something so that it 's not in the menu option so that you can do it much faster . postdoc a: Well , that 's the i I I think that might be a personal style thing . grad e: Well it just seems to me that if you wanna quickly " well was that Jane , no , was that Chuck , no , was that Morgan " , right now , you have to go up to the menu , and each time , go up to the menu , select it , listen to that channel then click below , and then go back to the menu , select the next one , and then click below . postdoc a: Yeah , it could be faster , but , you know , th in the ideal world Yeah . grad e: What ? postdoc a: No I I agree that 'd be nice . professor c: So , Done with that ?  Does any I forget , does anybody , working on any any Eurospeech submission related to this ? grad e: I would like to try to do something on digits but I just don't know if we have time . Yeah there was that we that 's right , we had that one conversation about , what what what did it mean for , one of those speakers to be pathological , was it a grad e: Right , and I haven't had s chance to sit down and listen . phd f: Oh , I haven't I haven't listened to them either , grad e: I was going to do that this afternoon . phd f: but there must be something wrong , grad e: Well , Morgan and I were were having a debate about that . phd f: unless our grad e: Whereas I think it it 's probably something pathologic and actually Stephane 's results , I think confirm that . He s he did the Aurora system also got very lousy average error , like fifteen or or , fifteen to twenty percent average ? But then he ran it just on the lapel , and got about five or six percent word error ? So that that means to me that somewhere in the other recordings there are some pathological cases . So I 'll I 'll listen to it and find out since you 'd actually split it up by segment . phd b: Did you run the Andreas the r SRI recognizer on the digits ? grad e: Oh , I thought he had sent that around to everyone , phd f: Yeah . grad e: did you just sent that to me ? phd f: No , I d I didn't . phd b: I it wasn't phd f: But , yeah , if you take grad e: It was bimodal . phd f: So if you Yeah , it 's actually , it  it was trimodal , actually grad e: Oh , was it trimodal , OK . phd f: trimodal , so professor c: There 's zero , a little bit , and a lot . phd f: there were t there was there was one h one bump at ze around zero , which were the native speakers , professor c: Yeah . phd b: This is error you 're talking about ? professor c: Oh was it fifteen ? phd f: whe phd b: OK . And then there was another distinct bump at , like , a hundred , which must have been some problem . phd f: I can't imagine that grad g: What is patho what do you mean by pathological ? grad e: Just just something really wrong with grad g: I 'm sorry , I don't grad e: A bug is what  , phd f: In the recording grad g: Oh . phd f: And there was this one meeting , I forget which one it was , where like , six out of the eight channels were all , like had a hundred percent error . grad e: Which probably means like there was a th the recording interface crashed , grad g: Right . grad e: or there was a short you know , someone was jiggling with a cord phd f: But grad e: or , I extracted it incorrectly , phd f: But grad e: it was labeled grad g:   grad e: it was transcribed incorrectly , something really bad happened , and I just haven't listened to it yet to find out what it was . phd f: So , if I excluded the pathological ones , by definition , those that had like over ninety - five percent error rate , and the non - natives , then the average error rate was like one point four or something , professor c: What we 're calling . phd f: which which seemed reasonable given that , you know , the models weren't tuned for for it . phd b: And it didn't matter whether it was the lapel or whether it was the phd f: It was just a @ @ . I haven't split it up that way , phd d: But there 's no overlap during the digit readings , so it shouldn't really matter . professor c: No , but there 's a little difference , phd f: So it should grad e: There 's a lot . professor c: And so , cuz because what he was what I was saying when I looked at those things is it it I was almost gonna call it quadrimodal because because there was a whole lot of cases where it was zero percent . But if you p if you actually histogrammed it , and it was a nice  , you know , it it was zero was the most of them , professor c: Yeah . phd f: And then there was the bump for the non - natives and then the pathological ones , professor c: I see . postdoc a: You did you have , something in the report about , about , for f  , forced alignment ? professor c: Yeah . postdoc a: Have you have you started on that ? phd f: Oh , well , yeah , so I 've been struggling with the forced alignments . So the scheme that I drew on the board last time where we tried to ,  allow reject models for the s speech from other speakers , most of the time it doesn't work very well . So , and the I haven't done  , the only way to check this right now was for me to actually load these into X Waves and , you know , plus the alignments , and s play them and see where the professor c:  . phd f: And it looks And so I looked at all of the utterances from you , Chuck , in that one conversation , I don't know which You probably know which one  , it 's where you were on the lapel and Morgan was sitting next to you and we can hear everything Morgan says . phd f: But and and some of what you  , you also appear quite a bit in that cross - talk . So , I actually went through all of those , there were I think fifty - five segments , in in X Waves , and and sort of did a crude check , and more often than not , it it gets it wrong . So there 's either the beginning , mostly the beginning word , where th you , you know , Chuck talks somewhere into the segment , but the first , word of what he says , often " I " but it 's very reduced " I , " that 's just aligned to the beginning of someone else 's speech ,  in that segment , which is cross - talk . So , I 'm still tinkering with it , but it might well be that we can't get clean alignments out of this out of those , channels , so . phd d: Right , but that 's  , that was our plan , phd f: Yeah , right . phd d: but it 's clear from Dan that this is not something you can do in a short amount of time . phd d: So so we you know , we had spent a lot of time , writing up the HLT paper and we wanted to use that , kind of analysis , professor c: Yeah . phd d: but the HLT paper has , you know , it 's a very crude measure of overlap . It 's not really something you could scientifically say is overlap , it 's just whether or not the , the segments that were all synchronized , whether there was some overlap somewhere . phd d: And , you know , that pointed out some differences , so he thought well if we can do something quick and dirty because Dan said the cross - cancellation , it 's not straight - forward . If it were straight - forward then we would try it , but so , it 's sort of good to hear that it was not straight - forward , thinking if we can get decent forced alignments , then at least we can do sort of a overall report of what happens with actual overlap in time , but ,  phd b: I didn't think that his message said it wasn't straight - forward . grad e: Well if we 'd just professor c: Well phd b: I thought he 's just saying you have to look over a longer time window when you do it . phd d: and the but there are some issues of this timing , in the recordings professor c: Yeah . phd d: and phd b: So you just have to look over longer time when you 're trying to align the things , you can't you can't just look grad e: Well . are you talking about the fact that the recording software doesn't do time - synchronous ? Is that what you 're referring to ? professor c:  grad e: That seems to me you can do that over the entire file and get a very accurate phd f: I don't thi I d I don't think that was the issue . phd f: The issue was that you have to you have have you first have to have a pretty good speech detection on the individual channels . phd d: And it 's dynamic , so I guess it was more dynamic than some simple models would be able t to so so there are some things available , and I don't know too much about this area where if people aren't moving around much than you could apply them , and it should work pretty well if you took care of this recording time difference . phd d: but then if you add the dynamic aspect of adapting distances , then it wasn't I guess it just wasn't something that he could do quickly and not in time for us to be able to do something by two weeks from now , so . So  , so I don't know what we can do if anything , that 's sort of worth , you know , a Eurospeech paper at this point . phd b: Well , Andreas , how well did it work on the non - lapel stuff ? grad e: Yeah . phd f: we would really need , ideally , a transcriber to time mark the you know , the be at least the beginning and s ends of contiguous speech .  , and , you know , then with the time marks , you can do an automatic comparison of your of your forced alignments . phd b: Because really the the at least in terms of how we were gonna use this in our system was to get an ideal an idea , for each channel about the start and end boundaries . phd b: We don't really care about like intermediate word boundaries , so phd f: No , that 's how I 've been looking at it . phd f: I don't care that the individual words are aligned correctly , phd b: Yeah . phd f: but you don't wanna , infer from the alignment that someone spoke who didn't . So that 's why I was wondering if it phd f: so , so phd b: maybe if it doesn't work for lapel stuff , we can just not use that phd f: Yeah . phd b: and phd f: I haven't I ha just haven't had the time to , do the same procedure on one of the so I would need a k I would need a channel that has a speaker whose who has a lot of overlap but s you know , is a non - lapel mike . grad e:  ! phd f: So , I grad e: So a meeting with me in it . phd f: maybe someone can help me find a good candidate and then I would be willing to phd b: We c you know what ? Maybe the best way to find that would be to look through these . phd f: you know , hand phd b: Cuz you can see the seat numbers , and then you can see what type of mike they were using . And so we just look for , you know , somebody sitting next to Adam at one of the meetings phd d: Actually y we can tell from the data that we have , phd f: From the insertions , maybe ? phd d: yeah , there 's a way to tell . phd f: fr fr from the phd d: It might not be a single person who 's always overlapping that person but any number of people , phd f: Right . phd d: and , if you align the two hypothesis files across the channels , you know , just word alignment , you 'd be able to find that . So so I guess that 's sort of a last ther there 're sort of a few things we could do . Another one was to try to get somehow align Thilo 's energy segmentations with what we have . But then you have the problem of not knowing where the words are because these meetings were done before that segmentation . phd b: What what is why do you need the , the forced alignment for the HLT  for the Eurospeech paper ? phd d: Well , I guess I I wanted to just do something not on recognition experiments because that 's ju way too early , but to be able to report , you know , actual numbers . Like if we if we had hand - transcribed pe good alignments or hand - checked alignments , then we could do this paper . But without knowing where the real words are , in time phd b: So it was to get it was to get more data and better to to squeeze the boundaries in . phd d: To to know what an overlap really if it 's really an overlap , or if it 's just a a a segment correlated with an overlap , phd b: Ah , OK . phd d: and I guess that 's the difference to me between like a real paper and a sort of , promissory paper . So , if we d it might be possible to take Thilo 's output and like if you have , like right now these meetings are all , grad e: Ugh ! I forgot the digital camera again . phd d: grad e: Every meeting ! phd d: you know , they 're time - aligned , so if these are two different channels and somebody 's talking here and somebody else is talking here , just that word , if Thilo can tell us that there 're boundaries here , we should be able to figure that out grad e:   phd d: Yeah , if you have two and they 're at the edges , it 's like here and here , and there 's speech here , then it doesn't really help you , so ,  phd b: Thilo 's won't put down two separate marks in that case phd d: Well it w it would , but , we don't know exactly where the words are because the transcriber gave us two words in this time bin grad e: Thilo 's will . phd d: and we don't really know , postdoc a: Well it 's a merging problem . If you had a if you had a s if you had a script which would phd d: yeah it 's postdoc a: I 've thought about this , and I 've discussed I 've discussed it with Thilo , phd d: if you have any ideas . I would postdoc a: the , I I in principle I could imagine writing a script which would approximate it to some degree , but there is this problem of slippage , grad e: Well maybe Maybe that will get enough of the cases to be useful . grad e: You know s cuz it seemed like most of the cases are in fact the single word sorts , or at least a single phrase postdoc a: Well they they can be stretched . postdoc a: I wouldn't make that generalization cuz sometimes people will say , " And then I " and there 's a long pause phd d: Yeah . postdoc a: and finish the sentence and and sometimes it looks coherent and and the  it 's it 's not a simple problem . But it 's really And then it 's coupled with the problem that sometimes , you know , with with a fricative you might get the beginning of the word cut off and so it 's coupled with the problem that Thilo 's isn't perfect either .  , we 've i th it 's like you have a merging problem plus so merging plus this problem of , not grad e: Right .  ! postdoc a: y i i if the speech - nonspeech were perfect to begin with , the detector , that would already be an improvement , but that 's impossible , you know , i that 's too much to ask . postdoc a: And so i and may you know , it 's I think that there always th there would have to be some hand - tweaking , but it 's possible that a script could be written to merge those two types of things . I 've I 've discussed it with Thilo and  in terms of not him doing it , but we we discussed some of the parameters of that and how hard it would be to in principle to write something that would do that . phd d: I guess in the future it won't be as much as an issue if transcribers are using the tightened boundaries to start with , then we have a good idea of where the forced alignment is constrained to . postdoc a: Well , it 's just , you know , a matter of we had the revolution we had the revolution of improved , interface , one month too late , phd d: So I 'm no I don't know if this grad e: Oh . postdoc a: but it 's like , you know , it 's wonderful to have the revolution , phd d: Oh it 's it 's a postdoc a: so it 's just a matter of of , you know , from now on we 'll be able to have things channelized to begin with . grad e: I was just thinking about the fact that if Thilo 's missed these short segments , that might be quite time - consuming for them to insert them . phd d: But he he also can adjust this minimum time duration constraint and then what you get is noises mostly , postdoc a: Yeah . phd d: but that might be OK , an grad e: It might be easier to delete something that 's wrong than to insert something that 's missing . And you can also see in the waveform exac grad e: What do you think , Jane ? phd d: yeah . professor c: If you can feel confident that what the yeah , that there 's actually something phd d: Yeah . Cuz then then you just delete it , and you don't have to pick a time . phd d: I think it 's postdoc a: Well the problem is I you know I I it 's a it 's a really good question , and I really find it a pain in the neck to delete things because you have to get the mouse up there on the t on the text line and i and otherwise you just use an arrow to get down  , i it depends on how lar th there 's so many extra things that would make it one of them harder than the other , or or vice versa . But , you know , in principle , like , you know , if one of them is easier then to bias it towards whichever one 's easier . grad e: Yeah , I guess the semantics aren't clear when you delete a segment , right ? Because you would say You would have to determine what the surroundings were . phd d: You could just say it 's a noise , though , and write , you know , a post - processor will just all you have to do is just grad e: If it 's really a noise . phd d: or just say it 's just put " X , " you know , like " not speech " or something , postdoc a: I think it 's easier to add than delete , frankly , phd d: and then you can get Yeah , or postdoc a: because you have to , maneuver around on the on both windows then . grad e: But I think it 's the semantics that are that are questionable to me , that you delete something So let 's say someone is talking to here , and then you have a little segment here . Well , is that part of the speech ? Is it part of the nonspeech ?  , w what do you embed it in ? phd d: There 's something nice , though , about keeping , and this is probably another discussion , keeping the stuff that Thilo 's detector detected as possible speech and just marking it as not speech than deleting it . Because then when you align it , then the alignment can you can put a reject model or whatever , grad e: Oh , I see . So then they could just like put Oh that 's what you meant by just put an " X " there . phd d: and you 're consistent with th the automatic system , grad e: that 's an interesting idea . phd d: whereas if you delete it grad e: So so all they So that all they would have to do is put like an " X " there . phd d: Yeah , or some , you know , dummy reject mod grad e: So blank for blank for silence , " S " " S " for speech , " X " " X " for something else . That 's actually a better way to do it cuz the a the forced alignment will probably be more consistent than postdoc a: Well , like , I think there 's a complication which is that that you can have speech and noise in s phd d:  if it 's just as easy , but postdoc a: you know , on the same channel , the same speaker , so now sometimes you get a ni microphone pop and , there 're these fuzzy hybrid cases , and then the problem with the boundaries that have to be shifted around . phd d: Anyway , quick question , though , at a high level do people think , let 's just say that we 're moving to this new era of like using the , pre - segmented t you know , non - synchronous conversations , does it make sense to try to take what we have now , which are the ones that , you know , we have recognition on which are synchronous and not time - tightened , and try to get something out of those for sort of purposes of illustrating the structure and the nature of the meetings , or is it better to just , you know , forget that and tr  , it 's grad e: Well , I think we 'll have to , eventually . grad e: But if we can't phd d: And maybe we can for the non - lapel , but grad e: But if we can't , then maybe we just have to phd d: is it worth if we can't then we can fake it even if we 're we report , you know , we 're wrong twenty percent of the time or ten percent of the time . grad e: Well , I 'm thinking are you talking about for a paper , or are talking about for the corpus . grad e:  cuz for the corpus it would be nice if everything were phd d: Actually that 's a good question because we 'd have to completely redo those meetings , and we have like ten of them now . grad e: We wouldn't have to re - do them , we would just have to edit them . postdoc a: Well , and also , I still haven't I still haven't given up on forced alignment . phd d: No , you 're right , actually postdoc a: I think that when Brian comes , this 'll be  an interesting aspect to ask him as well b grad e: When postdoc a: when Brian Kingsbury comes . And it 's like , " Who 's Ryan ? " postdoc a: Yeah , good question . phd d: no , that 's a good point , though , because for feature extraction like for prosody or something , the meetings we have now , it 's a good chunk of data grad e: Yep . postdoc a: That 's what my hope has been , phd d: So we should at least try it even if we can't , postdoc a: and that 's what that 's what you know , ever since the the February meeting that I transcribed from last year , forced alignment has been on the on the table as a way of cleaning them up later . phd d: right ? grad e: On the table , right ? postdoc a: And and so I 'm hopeful that that 's possible . I know that there 's complication in the overlap sections and with the lapel mikes , phd f: There 's postdoc a: but phd f: Yeah . phd d: we might be able , at the very worst , we can get transcribers to correct the cases where  , you sort of have a good estimate where these places are because the recognition 's so poor . Right ? phd b: Yeah , we were never just gonna go with these as the final alignments . phd d: So we need some way to push these first chunk of meetings into a state where we get good alignments . phd f: I 'm probably going to spend another day or so trying to improve things by , by using , acoustic adaptation .  , the Right now I 'm using the unadapted models for the forced alignments , and it 's possible that you get considerably better results if you , manage to adapt the , phone models to the speaker and the reject model to the to to all the other speech .  , so phd b: Could you could you at the same time adapt the reject model to the speech from all the other channels ? professor c: That 's what he just said . phd b: Oh , not just the speech from that of the other people from that channel , phd f: Right . I don't think that would work , phd f: No , it grad e: right ? Because you 'd A lot of it 's dominated by channel properties . phd d: But what you do wanna do is take the , even if it 's klugey , take the segments the synchronous segments , the ones from the HLT paper , where only that speaker was talking . phd f: So you want to u phd d: Use those for adaptation , cuz if you if you use everything , then you get all the cross - talk in the adaptation , and it 's just sort of blurred . I thought it was higher than that , that 's pr phd d: It really it depends a lot . professor c: Well I know what we 're not turning in to Eurospeech , a redo of the HLT paper . professor c: That I don't wanna do that , grad e: Yeah , I 'm doing that for AVIOS . phd d: I think Morgan 's talk went very well it woke postdoc a: Excellent . phd d: you know , it was really a well presented and got people laughing postdoc a: Yeah . phd f: Some good jokes in it ? grad e: Especially the batteried meter popping up , phd d: Yeah . professor c: You know , that wa that was the battery meter saying that it was fully charged , grad e: It 's full . grad e: He he he was onto the bullet points about talking about the you know the little hand - held , and trying to get lower power and so on , phd f: Po - low power grad e: and Microsoft pops up a little window saying " Your batteries are now fully charged . grad e: I 'm thinking about scripting that for my talk , you know , put put a little script in there to say " Your batteries are low " right when I 'm saying that . No  , i in in your case , you were joking about it , but , your case the fact that your talking about similar things at a couple of conferences , it 's not these are conferences that have d really different emphases . Whereas HLT and and Eurospeech , pretty pretty pretty similar , so I I I can't see really just putting in the same thing , grad e: Are too close , yeah . phd d: No , I d I don't think that paper is really professor c: but phd d: the HLT paper is really more of a introduction - to - the - project paper , and ,  professor c: Yeah . phd d: Well , yeah , it it 's probably wouldn't make sense , professor c: Or some or some  , I would see Eurospeech if we have some Eurospeech papers , these will be paper p p  , submissions . phd d: but professor c: These will be things that are particular things , aspects of it that we 're looking at , rather than , you know , attempt at a global paper about it . I had , one of the transcribers go through and tighten up the bins on one of the , NSA meetings , and then I went through afterwards and double - checked it so that one is really very very accurate . I sent You know that one ? phd d: Oh , so grad g: The which one ? I 'm sorry . postdoc a: I 'm trying to remember I don't remember the number off hand . grad e: Those are all postdoc a: It 's one of the NSA 's . postdoc a: I 'm sure that that one 's accurate , I 've been through it myself . phd f: oh , Darn ! grad g: Yeah , that 's the problem with the NSA speakers . phd d: And e and e and extremely hard to follow , like word - wise , grad e: So . phd d: I bet the transcri  , I have no idea what they 're talking about , grad g: Yeah . phd d: so , postdoc a: I 'm sure that , they 're they 're accurate now . grad e: oh , before you l go I guess it 's alright for you to talk a little without the mike I noticed you adjusting the mike a lot , did it not fit you well ? Oh . postdoc a: Well I won I noticed when you turned your head , it would it would tilt . grad e: Maybe it wasn't just tightened enough , or phd d: Maybe the yeah , the s thing that you have tightened @ @ , phd b: Actually if if you have a larger head , that mike 's gotta go farther away which means the the balance is gonna make it wanna tip down . grad e: Cuz , I 'm just thinking , you know , we were we 're we 've been talking about changing the mikes , for a while , grad g:  postdoc a: Yeah . grad e: and if these aren't acoustically they seem really good , but if they 're not comfortable , we have the same problems we have with these stupid things . postdoc a: I think it 's com This is the first time I 've worn this , I find it very comfortable . grad e: I find it very comfortable too , but , it looked like Andreas was having problems , and I think Morgan was saying it professor c: Well , but I had it on I had it on this morning and it was fine . phd b: Can I see that ? grad e: Oh , oh you did wear it this morning ? professor c: Yeah . phd b: I yeah , I don't want it on , I just I just want to , say what I think is a problem with this . If you are wearing this over your ears and you 've got it all the way out here , then the balance is gonna want to pull it this way . phd b: Where as if somebody with a smaller head has it back here , grad e: It 's more balanced . postdoc a: Oh ! phd b: Then it then it falls back this way so it 's phd d: So we have to grad e: Well wh what it 's supposed to do is the backstrap is supposed to be under your crown , and so that should be should be postdoc a: Ah . grad e: if it 's right against your head there , which is what it 's supposed to be , that balances it so it doesn't slide up . grad e: Yep , right right below if you feel the back of your head , you feel a little lump , phd b: Yeah . phd d: So I 'm not saying anything about bias towards small headsize , grad e: About heads ? phd d: but does seem ,  phd b: It would be an advantage . postdoc a: Well , wonder if it 's if if he was wearing it over his hair instead of under his hair . professor c: Well , we should We shou we should work on compressing the heads , and grad e: I think probably it was Yeah .  , so the directions do talk about bending it to your size , which is not really what we want . phd b: The other thing that would do it would be to hang a five pound weight off the back . professor c: that 's good ! postdoc a: What did you say ? phd d: A little , grad e: wh professor c: Hang a five pound weight off the off the back . grad e: We at Boeing I used I was doing augmented reality so they had head - mounts on , and we we had a little jury - rigged one with a welder 's helmet , phd b: Counter - balance . grad e: and we had just a bag with a bunch of marbles in it as a counter - balance . If people those who talk a lot have to wear heavier weights or something , and grad e: Yeah ! professor c: and  , grad e: Anyway . professor c: so , what was I gonna say ? Oh , yeah , I was gonna say , I had these , conversations with NIST folks also while I was there and and , so they they have their their plan for a room , with , mikes in the middle of the table , and , close - mounted mikes , grad e: Yep . professor c: and they 're talking about close - mounted and lapels , just cuz phd d: And arrays , professor c: sort of and the array . grad e: And arrays , professor c: Yeah , so they were phd d: which is the i interesting grad e: yep . professor c: And yeah , like multiple multiple video cameras coverin covering every everybody every place in the room , phd d: and video , right . professor c: the yeah the the mikes in the middle , the head - mounted mikes , the lapel mikes , the array , with well , there 's some discussion of fifty - nine , grad e: Fifty - nine elements . professor c: they might go down to fifty - seven Because , there is , some pressure from a couple people at the meeting for them to use a KEMAR head . professor c: but what it is is it 's dummy head that is very specially designed , grad e: Oh , that 's right . professor c: and and and , so what they 're actually doing is they 're really there 's really two recording systems . professor c: So they may not be precisely synchronous , but the but there 's two two recording systems , one with , I think , twenty - four channels , and one with sixty - four channels . And the sixty - four channel one is for the array , but they 've got some empty channels there , and anyway they like they 're saying they may give up a couple or something if for for the KEMAR head if they go go with that . grad e: Yeah , h  , J Jonathan Fiscus did say that , they have lots of software for doing calibration for skew and offset between channels phd d:  -  grad e: and that they 've found that 's just not a big deal . I was thinking phd d: But they 're still planning to do like fake grad e: Scenario - based . grad e: But it sounded like they were pretty well thought out phd d: Yeah , th that 's true . grad e: and they 're they 're gonna be real meetings , postdoc a:   grad e: it 's just that they 're with str with people who would not be meeting otherwise . phd b: Did did they give a talk on this or was this informal ? phd d:   phd b: What was the ,  the paper by , Lori Lamel that you mentioned ? professor c: yeah , we sh we should just have you have you read it , but , I mea ba i i  , we 've all got these little proceedings , postdoc a: Mmm , yeah . professor c: but , basically , it was about , going to a new task where you have insufficient data and using using data from something else , and adapting , and how well that works .  , so in in fact it was pretty related to what Liz and Andreas did , except that this was not with meeting stuff , it was with grad e: Right . professor c: like I think they s didn't they start off with Broadcast News system ? And then they went to grad e: The - their Broadcast News was their acoustic models and then all the other tasks were much simpler . phd b: What was their rough what was their conclusion ? grad e: Yeah , read Wall Street Journal . phd d: Well , it 's it 's a good paper ,  professor c: Yeah , yeah . phd d: Bring the grad e: That It not only works , in some cases it was better , which I thought was pretty interesting , but that 's cuz they didn't control for parameters . phd b: Did they ever try going going the other direction from simpler task to more complicated tasks , grad e: acoustic models were a lot more complex . grad e: Yeah , well , one of the big problems with that is is often the simpler task isn't fully doesn't have all the phones in it , professor c: Yeah . grad e: like for the spr speech proxy thing that I did ? That 's what I did . Yeah , and they have  they have better adaptation than we had than that that system , grad e: Yep . professor c: yeah , we should probably what would actually what we should do , I haven't said anything about this , but probably the five of us should pick out a paper or two that that , you know , got our interest , and we should go around the room at one of the Tuesday lunch meetings and say , you know , what what was good about the conference , grad e: Present . phd d: Well , the summarization stuff was interesting , I don't know anything about that field , but for this proposal on meeting summarization , it 's sort of a far cry because they weren't working with meeting type data , but he got sort of an overview on some of the different approaches , grad e: Right . phd b: Do you remember who the groups were that we 're doing ? phd d: so . phd d: but , there 's that 's a huge field and probably the groups there may not be representative of the field , I I don't know exactly that everyone submits to this particular conference , phd b: Was were there folks from BBN presenting ? phd d: but yet there was , let 's see , this was on the last day , Mitre , BBN , and , Prager grad e: Mitre , BBN , IBM . phd d: no it was grad e: Wasn't Who who who did the order one ? phd d: this was Wednesday morning . The sentence ordering one , was that Barselou , and these guys ? grad e: Ugh ! I 'm just so bad at that . phd d: Anyway , I I it 's in the program , I should have read it to remind myself , but that 's sort of useful and I think like when Mari and Katrin and Jeff are here it 'd be good to figure out some kinds of things that we can start doing maybe just on the transcripts cuz we already have professor c:   postdoc a: Well , I like the idea that Adam had of of , z maybe generating minutes based on some of these things that we have because it would be easy to to to do that just , you know , and and phd d: Right . postdoc a: it has to be , though , someone from this group because of the technical nature of the thing . grad e: Someone who actually does take notes , I 'm very bad at note - taking . phd d: But I think what 's interesting is there 's all these different evaluations , like just , you know , how do you evaluate whether the summary is good or not , grad e: I always write down the wrong things . phd d: and that 's what 's was sort of interesting to me is that there 's different ways to do it , grad e: A judge . phd d: and phd b: Was SRA one of the groups talking about summarization , no ? grad e: Yep . One of those w grad e: And as I said , I like the Microsoft talk on scaling issues in , word sense disambiguation , phd d: Yeah . professor c: Yeah , that was an interesting discussion , grad e: The professor c: I grad e: It it it was the only one It was the only one that had any sort of real disagreement about . phd d: The data issue comes up all the ti professor c: Well , I didn't have as much disagreement as I would have liked , grad e: So . professor c: but I didn't wanna I wouldn I didn't wanna get into it because , you know , it was the application was one I didn't know anything about , grad e: Yep . professor c: it just would have been , you know , me getting up to be argumentative , but but , the missing thi so so what they were saying it 's one of these things is you know , all you need is more data , sort of But I mea i wh it @ @ that 's that 's dissing it , improperly , it was a nice study .  , they were doing this it wasn't word - sense disambiguation , it was phd d: Yeah yeah yeah grad e: Well , it sort of was . grad e: But it was it was a very simple case of " to " versus " too " versus " two " and " there " , " their " , " they 're " phd d: And there and their and professor c: Yeah , yeah . phd d: and that you could do better with more data , that 's clearly statistically professor c: Right . professor c: And so , what they did was they had these different kinds of learning machines , and they had different amounts of data , and so they did like , you know , eight different methods that everybody , you know , argues about about , " Oh my my kind of learning machine is better than your kind of learning machine . " And , they were started off with a million words that they used , which was evidently a number that a lot of people doing that particular kind of task had been using . And then they had this log scale showing a you know , and and naturally everything gets grad e: Them being beep , they went off to a billion . professor c: they well , it 's a big company , I didn't I didn't mean it as a ne anything negative , grad e: Yeah . professor c: but i i i phd d: You mean the bigger the company the more words they use for training ? grad e: Well , I think the reason they can do that , is that they assumed that text that they get off the web , like from Wall Street Journal , is correct , and edit it . Of course there was the kind of effect that , you know , one would expect that  that you got better and better performance with more and more data .  , but the the real point was that the the different learning machines are sort of all over the place , and and by by going up significantly in data you can have much bigger effect then by switching learning machines and furthermore which learning machine was on top kind of depended on where you were in this picture , so , phd b: This was my concern about the recognizer in Aurora . professor c: That phd b: That the differences we 're seeing in the front - end is b professor c: Yeah . phd d: If you add more data ? Or phd b: You know ? professor c: Yeah . So so , that was that was kind of , you know , it 's a good point , but the problem I had with it was that the implications out of this was that , the kind of choices you make about learning machines were therefore irrelevant which is not at n t as for as I know in in tasks I 'm more familiar with @ @ is not at all true . What i what is is true is that different learning machines have different properties , and you wanna know what those properties are . And someone else sort of implied that well we s you know , a all the study of learning machine we still don't know what those properties are . We don't know them perfectly , but we know that some kinds use more memory and and some other kinds use more computation and some are are hav have limited kind of discrimination , but are just easy to use , and others are phd b: But doesn't their conclusion just sort of you could have guessed that before they even started ? Because if you assume that these learning things get better and better and better , professor c: You would guess phd b: then as you approach there 's a point where you can't get any better , right ? You get everything right . phd d: It 's just no grad e: But phd b: So they 're all approaching . phd b: But what I 'm saying is that th they have to , as they all get better , they have to get closer together . phd b: But they 're all going the same way , right ? So you have to get closer . phd b: Oh they didn't ? professor c: Well grad e: They just switched position . professor c: well that 's getting cl  , yeah , the spread was still pretty wide that 's th that 's true , grad e: Yep . professor c: but but , I think it would be irntu intu intuition that this would be the case , but , to really see it and to have the intuition is quite different , I think somebody w w let 's see who was talking about earlier that the effect of having a lot more data is quite different in Switchboard than it is in in Broadcast News , phd d: Well it 's different for different tasks . phd d: So it depends a lot on whether , you know , it disambiguation is exactly the case where more data is better , right ? You 're you 're you can assume similar distributions , professor c: Yeah . phd d: but if you wanted to do disambiguation on a different type of , test data then your training data , then that extra data wouldn't generalize , grad e: Right . w  , I think one of them was that " Well , maybe simpler algorithms and more data are is better " . Right ? Because their simplest , most brain - dead algorithm did pretty darn well professor c:   Why are you sticking with a million words ? "  , their point was that this million - word corpus that everyone uses is apparently ten or fifteen years old . But anyway , I I I think it 's it 's just the the i it 's it 's it 's not really the conclusion they came to so much , as the conclusion that some of the , commenters in the crowd came up with grad e: But we could talk about this stuff , I think this would be fun to do . professor c: that , you know , this therefore is further evidence that , you know , more data is really all you should care about , and that I thought was just kind of going too far the other way , grad e: Machine - learning . professor c: and and the the , one one person ga g g got up and made a a brief defense , but it was a different kind of grounds , it was that that , i w the reason people were not using so much data before was not because they were stupid or didn't realize data was important , but in fact th they didn't have it available .  , but the other point to make a again is that , machine learning still does matter , but it it matters more in some situations than in others , and it and also there 's there 's not just mattering or not mattering , but there 's mattering in different ways .  , you might be in some situation where you care how much memory you 're using , or you care , you know , what recall time is , grad e: Right . professor c: or you care , you know , and and grad e: Or you only have a million words for your some new task . professor c: Yeah , or or ,  phd d: Or done another language , or  , you so there 's papers on portability and rapid prototyping and blah - blah - blah , grad e: Yep . " professor c: And there 's cost ! phd d: So , these are like two different religions , basically . professor c: you know , so so these ,  th the in the in the speech side , the thing that @ @ always occurs to me is that if you if you  one person has a system that requires ten thousand hours to train on , and the other only requires a hundred , and they both do about the same because the hundred hour one was smarter , that 's that 's gonna be better . because people , there isn't gonna be just one system that people train on grad e: Yep . She put this up , and it was like this is this p people kept saying , " Can I see that slide again ? " professor c: Yeah . phd d: Yeah , postdoc a: and then they 'd make a comment , and one person said , well - known person said , you know , " Before you dismiss forty - five years including my work " phd d: yeah . phd d: But th you know , the same thing has happened in computational linguistics , right ? You look at the ACL papers coming out , and now there 's sort of a turn back towards , OK we 've learned statistic you know , we 're basically getting what we expect out of some statistical methods , and , you know , the there 's arguments on both sides , grad e: Yep . grad e: Is that all all of them are based on all the others , right ? Just , you you can't say phd b: Maybe they should have said " focus " or something . And I 'm saying the same thing happened with speech recognition , right ? For a long time people were hand - c coding linguistic rules and then they discovered machine - learning worked better . And now they 're throwing more and more data and worrying perhaps worrying less and less about , the exact details of the algorithms . phd d: And and then you hit this grad e: Except when they have a Eurospeech paper . grad e: Shall we read some digits ? Are we gonna do one at a time ? Or should we read them all agai at once again
So , before we get started with the , technical part , I just want to review what I think is happening with the our data collection . Th - this this is s should be im it isn't There 's another thing going on of gathering data , and that 's pretty much independent of this . What we think is gonna happen is that , in parallel starting about now we 're gonna get Fey to , where you 're working with me and Robert , draft a note that we 're gonna send out to various CogSci c and other classes saying , " here 's an opportunity to be a subject . " And then there 'll be a certain number of  , hours during the week which she will be available and we 'll bring in people .  , roughly how many , Robert ? We d Do we know ? grad c: fifty was our sort of our first professor b: OK . So , we 're looking for a total of fifty people , not necessarily by any means all students but we 'll s we 'll start with with that . And , so , I guess there 's a plan to have a meeting Friday afternoon  , with  , Jane , and maybe Liz and whoever , on actually getting the script worked out . But what I 'd like to do , if it 's O K , is to s to , as I say , start the recruiting in parallel and possibly start running subjects next week . The week after that 's Spring Break , and maybe we 'll look for them some subjects next door grad c: Yeah . Also , F both Fey and I will , do something of which I may , eh kindly ask you to to do the same thing , which is we gonna check out our social infrastructures for possible subjects . So , if you happen to be sort of in a non - student social setting , and you know people who may be interested in being subjects We also considered using the Berkeley High School and their teachers , maybe , and get them interested in stuff . But I I will just make a first draft of the , note , the " write - up " note , send it to you and Fey and then professor b: And why don't you also copy Jane on it ? grad c: And , Are we Have we concurred that , these these forms are sufficient for us , and necessary ? professor b: th I think they 're necessary . professor b: and I think we 're just gonna use it as it is , and  grad c: N . There 's one tricky part about , they have the right  I The last paragraph " if you agree to participate you have the opportunity to have anything excised which you would prefer not to have included in the data set . " OK ? Now that , we had to be included for this other one which might have , meetings , you know , about something .  , so what I 'd like to do is also have our subjects sign a waiver saying " I don't want to see the final transcript " . professor b: And if they don't If they say " no , I 'm not willing to sign that " , then we 'll show them the final transcript . professor b: That ,  yeah , so we might actually ,  S i Jane may say that , " you know , you can't do this " , " on the same form , we need a separate form . I 'd I 'd I 'd like to , e e  , add an a little thi eh a thing for them to initial , saying " nah , do I don't want to see the final transcript . professor b: But other than that , that 's one 's been approved , this really is the same project , rec you know . grad c: And ,  and now it 's We have a complete English parser that does everything the German parser does . grad e: What did you end up having to do ?  , wha Was there anything interesting about it at all ? grad c: Well , if you , eh grad d: We 'll show you . professor b: Yeah , we can show us , grad e: or are we gonna see that ? professor b: right ? grad c: Well , w w We d The first we did is we we tried to to do change the the " laufen " into " run " , or " running " , or " runs " . grad c: So this sentence sentence is parses the p the same output , grad e:  . grad c: If if you 'd add add Today and Evening , it 'll add Time or not . grad e: And the t and the time , right ? grad c: So it i it does look at that . grad c: But all the rest is p simply frosting on the cake , and it 's optional for that parser . professor b: So , you can sho You you Are are you gonna show us the little templates ? grad c: And grad e: S grad c: Yeah . I I also have it running here , grad e: The former end g " Oh , I see . grad c: so if I do this now , you can see that it parsed the wonderful English sentence , " Which films are on the cinema today evening ? " But ,  . professor b: No i grad c: It could be " this evening , which which films are on the cinema " , or " running in the cinema , which "  , " today evening " ,  i " Is anything happening in the cinema this evening ? " grad e: OK . professor b: Well grad c: Ge - elaborate , or , more or less ,  professor b: Actually , it 's a little tricky , in that there 's some allowable German orders which aren't allowable English orders and so forth . So it it doe I it These u these optional elements , grad c: It is not professor b: it 's it 's actually a set , not a sequence ? grad c: Yeah . We were I was afraid that ,  professor b: Oh ! grad e: So it really is key word matching , basically . What 's an idiomatic of phrasing this ? Which films are showing ? grad d: Are pl playing at the cinema ? grad c: playing ? grad d: Yeah . grad e: Tonight ? grad d: I changed that file , actually , where it 's on my account . grad e: This this evening ? phd f: Actually , you would say , " which films are on tonight ? " grad d: You want to get it ? Or is di was it easy to get it ? grad c:  . grad c: Except that we d w we don't have this , time information here now , which is ,  Oh . And ,  you have already to make it a little bit more elaborate , right ? grad d: Yeah ,  I changed those sentences to make it , more , idiomatic . And , of course , you can have i many variations in those sentences , they will still parse fine . So , if you want to look at the templates , they 're conveniently located in a file , " template " . I had to change , @ @ " Spielfilm " to " film " , " Film " to " movie " , cinem " Kino " to " cinema " to " today " heu " heute " to " today " , grad e: Huh . grad c: evening " Abend " to " evening " professor b: Capitalized as well grad a:  . professor b: Y i grad d: One thing I was wondering , was , those functions there , are those things that modify the M - three - L basically ? grad c: Yep . grad c: And that 's that 's the next step , professor b: p grad c: but we 'll get to that in a second . professor b: So so , the point is , if it says " this " and " see " , it also will work in " see " and " this " ? grad e: S professor b: In the other order ? grad c: Yeah . professor b: with those two key words ? grad c: Should we try it ? professor b: " This is the one I want to see " or whatever . grad c: It 's correct , but I don't know where it gets it from . grad d:  it 's sort of grad c: And " see this " is exactly the same thing . grad d: One thing I was wondering was , those percentage signs , right ? So , why do we even have them ? grad c: Yep . grad d: Because if you didn't have them grad c: I 'll tell you why . grad c: And the value of the score is , v I assume , I guess , the more of these optional things that are actually in there , the higher the r score it is .  , let 's hope that the generation will not be more difficult , even though the generator is a little bit more complex .  but we 'll Mmm , that means we may need two hours and twenty minutes rather than an hour ten minutes , professor b: Alright . grad c: And the next thing I would like to be able to do , and it seems like this would not be too difficult either , is to say , " OK let 's now pretend we actually wanted to not only change the the mapping of of , words to the M - three - L but we also wanted to change add a new sentence type and and make up some some new M - three - L s " professor b: Yep . And , grad d: So , that 's grad c: that 's shouldn't be too tough . Yeah , so where are those those functions " Action " , " Goodbye " , and so on , right ? Are they actually , Are they going to be called ?  , are they present in the code for the parser ? grad c: Yeah . So what it probably does , is it takes the ,  Is this where it is ? This is already the XML stuff ? This is where it takes its own , syntax , and converts it somehow . Where is the  grad d: What are you looking for ? grad c: where it actually produces the the XML out of the , parsed stuff . You mean , where the where the act how the action " Goodbye " maps into something grad d: Yeah . So when it encounts encounters " Day " , it will , activate those h classes in the in the XML stuff But ,  I saw those actions  , the " Goodbye " stuff somewhere . So whatever n this does  this is , basically , looks l to me like a function call , right ? professor b:  ? Oh , yeah . grad c: And ,  So , whenever it it encounters " Goodbye " , which we can make it do in a second , here grad a: That function automatically generates an initialized XML structure ? grad c: I grad d: I think each of those functions act on the current XML structure , and change it in some way , for example , by adding a a l a field to it , or something . professor b: cause some of them there were other actions  , that that s seemed to step state variables somewhere , grad d: Right . professor b: and confirm that it 's grad c: W we  -  grad d: Oh , you mean that 's not going to actually modify the tree , professor b: I think that 's right . grad c: e mmm  , well i There is a feature called " Discourse - Status " , grad d: When there 's a feature . grad c: And so whenever I just say , " Write " , it will it will put this in here . professor b: Oh , so it always just Is it So it Well , go back , then , cuz it may be that all those th things , while they look like function calls , are just a way of adding exactly that to the XML . grad c: So , this professor b: e I 'm not sure e that grad c:  well , we we 'll see , when we say , let 's test something , " Goodbye " , causes it to c to create basically an " Action Goodbye - End - Action " . grad c: Now , if we know that " Write " produces a " Feature Discourse - Status Confirm Discourse - Status " . But there is some kind of function call , because how does it know to put Goodbye in Content , but , Confirm in Features ? grad c: Oh . It d it n That 's because grad d: So So , it 's not just that it 's adding that field . professor b: It 's it 's the It 's under what sub - type you 're doing it . grad c: Well , sometimes it m Sometimes , i grad d: Well , they 're defined somewhere , presumably . grad c: it grad a: Well , it just automatically initializes things that are common , right ? professor b:  grad a: So it 's just a shorthand . And there is , here , a reference So , this tells us that whatever is has the ID " zero " is referenced here by @ @ the restriction seed and this is exa " I want " What was the sentence ? professor b: " I want two seats here . Here , we change and so , we Here we add something to the Discourse - Status , that the user wants to change something that was sort of done before And ,  and that , whatever is being changed has something to do with the cinema . grad a: So then , whatever takes this M - three - L is what actually changes the state , not the Yeah , OK . I definitely think it 's It 's worth the exercise of trying to actually add something that isn't there . grad c:  ? professor b:  Disc grad c: Sort of get a complete understanding of the whole thing . Then the next thing we talked about is actually , figuring out how to add our own tags , and stuff like that . So , this is  , what I got today is the the new  M - three - L for  , the Maps , professor b: Yep . grad c: and with some examples So , this is the XML and this is sort of what it will look like later on , even though it you can't see it on on this resolution . And this is what it sort of is the the structure of Map requests ,  also not very interesting , and here is the more interesting stuff for us , is the routes , route elements , and , again , as we thought it 's really simple . We have @ @ simple " from objects " and " to objects " and so forth , points of interest along the way And , I asked them whether or not we could ,  First of all , I was little bit It seemed to me that this m way of doing it is sort of a stack a step backwards from the way we 've done it before . professor b: S grad c: So these are these are professor b: So these are these are your friends back at EML . There 's there 's not seven committees , or anything , right ? grad c: No . And every every element of that e r r f of that Every segment we call a " route element " . And so , from A to B we cut up in three different steps , and every step has a " from object " where you start , a " to object " where y where you sort of end , and some points of interest along the way . What w I was sort of missing here , and  , maybe it was just me being too stupid , is , I didn't sort of get the the notion of the global goal of the whole route . And I suggested that they should n be k  , kind enough to do s two things for us , is one , Also allocating , some tags for our Action Schema Enter - Vista - Approach , and And also , since you had suggested that that , we figure out if we ever , for a demo reason , wanted to shortcut directly to the g GIS and the Planner , of how we can do it . Now , what 's the state of the art of getting to entrances , what 's the syntax for that , how get getting to vista points and calculating those on the spot . Wherever you 'll find a route planner it n does nothing but get to the closest point where the street network is at minimal distance to the geometric center . Let ,  I want a a Again , outside of m almost managerial point ,  You 're in the midst of this , so you know better . But it seems to me it 's probably a good idea to li  minimize the number of  , change requests we make of them . Does this does this make sense to you guys ? It  you 're you 're doing the the interaction but it seemed to me that what we ought to do is come up with a  , something where you ,  And I I don't know who 's mok working most closely on it .  , take what they have , send it to everybody saying " this is what they have , this is what we think we should add " , OK ? and then have a d a an iteration within our group saying "  , well " OK ? And get our best idea of what we should add . Is i or , I don't know does this make sense to you ? Or grad c: Yeah . Especially if we want Sort of , what I my feeling was eh we we sort of reserved something that has a r eh an OK label . grad c: I w No matter how we want to call it , this is sort of our playground . grad c: And if we get something in there that is a structure elaborate and and and and and complex enough to to to maybe enable a whole simulation , one of these days , that would be u the the perfect goal . What are the thl class of things we think we might try to do in a year or two ? How how would we try to characterize those and what do we want to request now that 's leave enough space to do all that stuff ? grad c:   professor b: And so that sounds like a great thing to do as the priority item  , as soon as we can do it . professor b: So y so you guys will send to the rest of us  a version of  , this , and the  , description grad a: With sugge yeah , suggested improvements and professor b: Well b Yeah . So , the the  Not everyone  , reads German , so if you 'd  grad a: Mmm . Then , with some sug s suggestions about where where do we go from here ? grad a: OK . But for the moment just  , t for this class of of things , we might want to try to encompass . This is this is everything that that , you know ,  we might want to do in the next couple years . So I just this XML stuff here just has to do with Source - Path - Goal type stuff , in terms of traveling through Heidelberg . grad a: So , but this O Is the domain greater than that ? professor b: No . It 's beyond Source - Path - Goal , but I think we don't need to get beyond it @ @ tourists in Heidelberg . professor b: It seems to me we can get all the complexity we want in actions and in language without going outside of tourists in Heidelberg . OK ? But you know , i depending on what people are interested in , one could have , tours , one could have  , explanations of why something is is , you know , why why was this done , or  , no there 's no end to the complexity you can build into the  , what a tourist in Heidelberg might ask . professor b: So , at least unless somebody else wants t to suggest otherwise I think the general domain we don't have t to  , broaden . And if there 's something somebody comes up with that can't be done that way , then , sure . W we 'll we 'll look at that , but  I 'd be s I I 'd be surprised at if there 's any important issue that that And ,   if if you want to  , push us into reference problems , that would be great . professor b: and you know , what what are these things referring to ? Not only anaphora , but , more generally the ,  this whole issue of , referring expressions , and , what is it that they 're actually dealing with in the world ? grad c:   professor b: And , again , this is li in the databa this is also pretty well formed because there is an ontology , and the database , and stuff . professor b: There aren't really deep mysteries about  , what w what things the system knows about . professor b: And a l and a lot and and anaphora , and pronouns , grad c: Nuh . grad c: Now , we hav the the whole Unfortunately , the whole database is , in German . We have just commissioned someone to translate some bits of it , IE the e the shortest k the the more general descriptions of all the objects and , persons and events . But did y I  I think there will be great because the reference problem really is not trivial , even if you have such a g well - defined world . grad a: Could you give me an example of a reference problem ? so so l I can make it more concrete ? grad c: Well How do I get to the Powder - Tower ? We sort of t think that our bit in this problem is interesting , but , just to get from Powder - Tower to an object I ID in a database is also not really trivial . phd f: Or or if you take something even more scary , " how do I get to the third building after the Tower ? the Ple - Powder - Tower ? " grad a: Mmm . Or , you know , the church across from City Hall , or grad a: Or the re the restaurant where they wear lederhosen ? grad c: Or the phd f: Right . grad c: O or or tower , or this tower , or that building , or phd f: Right . Trying to professor b: Or you can say " how " you know , " how do I get back ? " grad a: Yeah , yeah . And , again , it 's just a question of which of these things , people want to dive into . What , I think I 'm gonna try to do , and I guess , pwww ! let 's say that by the end of spring break , I 'll try to come up with some general story about , construction grammar , and what constructions we 'd use and how all this might fit together . grad c: u u u u That 's what strikes me , that we sort of the de g  , small Something , maybe we should address one of these days , is to That most of the work people actually always do is look at some statements , and and analyze those . grad c: But the whole i is it is it really relevant that we are dealing mostly with , sort of , questions ? professor b: Oh , yeah ? grad c: you know professor b: Well ,  yeah , I d grad c: And this is It seems to me that we should maybe at least spend a session or or brainstorm a little bit about whether that l this is special case in that sense . You know Did we ever find m metaphorical use in in questions in in that sense , really ? professor b: Yeah . grad c: " Who got kicked out of France ? " phd f: Muh professor b: Yeah , or , you know . " Wh - why is he why is he pushing for promotion ? " grad c: Nuh . professor b: er , just pick pick any of them and just do the eh grad c:   professor b: So I don't I don't think , it 's at all difficult  , to convert them to question forms that really exist and people say all the time ,  And sort of we don't know how to handle them , too . Right ?  , it 's I d It We don't know how to handle the declarative forms , @ @ really , and , then , the interrogative forms , ah - oh . grad d: Ooo ! professor b: Nancy , it looked like you were s grad e: Oh . it 's just that that the goals are g very different to cases So we had this problem last year when we first thought about this domain , actually , was that most of the things we talked about are our story understanding . grad e: we 're gonna have a short discourse and the person talking is trying to , I don't know , give you a statement and tell you something . And here , it 's th grad c: Help you create a mental model , blah - blah - blah . grad e: And then here , y you are j  , the person is getting information and they or may not be following some larger plan , you know , that we have to recognize or , you know , infer . And th th the their discourse patterns probably don't follo follow quite as many logical connec professor b: Right . No , I think that 's one of things that 's interesting , is is in this sort of over - arching story we we worked it out for th as you say , this the storytelling scenario . Cuz for a while we were thinking , " well , how can we change the , data to sort of illicit tha illicit , actions that are more like what we are used to ? " But obviously we would rather , you know , try to figure out what 's what 's , you know professor b: Well , I don't know .  , maybe maybe that 's what we 'll do is is s u e We can do anything we want with it . professor b: OK , and the one for next  , summer is just half done and then the other half is this , " generation thing " which we think isn't much different . professor b: So once that 's done , then all the rest of it is , sort of , you know , what we want to do for the research . And we can w we can do all sorts of things that don't fit into their framework at all . professor b: If we can use all the , execution engines , then we can , you know , really try things that would be too too much pain to do ourselves . So , if we want to turn it into u understan standing stories about Heidelberg , we can do that .  , that would just be a t a  grad c: Or , as a matter of fact , we need and if we if we ' r eh take a ten year perspective , we need to do that , because w e w a Assuming we have this , we we ta in that case we actually do have these wonderful stories , and historical anecdotes , professor b: Yeah . So , th the database is huge , and if we want to answer a question on that , we actually have to go one step before that , and understand that . grad c: And so , this has been a a a Deep Map research issue that was is is part of the unresolved , and to - do 's , and something for the future , is how can we sort of run our our text , our content , through a machine that will enable us , later , to retrieve or answer e questions more sensibly ? phd f: Mwa   S Who 's going ? phd f: So ,  So , I was just going to ask , so , what is the the basic thing that that you are , obligated to do , by the summer before w  y c we can move professor b: Ah ! OK . So , what happened is , there 's this , eh ,  Robert was describing the There 's two packages there 's a , quote parser , there 's a particular piece of this big system , which , in German , takes these t sentence templates and produces XML structures . professor b: The other thing is , at the other end , roughly at the same level , there 's something that takes , X M L structures , produces an output XML structure which is instructions for the generator . professor b: OK ? And then there 's a language generator , and then after that a s a synthesizer that goes from an XML structure to , language generation , to actual specifications for a synthesizer . Eh , but again , there 's one module in which there 's one piece that we have to convert to English . And that But as I say , this is all along was viewed as a kind of a m a minor thing , necessary , but but not phd f: Right . professor b: And much more interesting is the fact that , as part of doing this , we we are , you know , inheriting this system that does all sort of these other things . professor b: Not precisely what we want , and that 's that 's wh where it it gets difficult . So , e enough of that , but I , mmm , the e sort of , Johno and I will take up that responsibility , and , get a first draft of that . grad c: y you guys sort of started fighting , on the Bayes - net " Noisy - OR " front ? grad d:  . Yeah , I thought I should , talk a little bit about that , because that might be a good , sort of architecture to have , in general for , problems with , you know , multiple inputs to a node . And what 's the other one ? so that just we know what the d agenda is ? grad c: the Wu paper , I think maybe professor b: Oh , yeah .  , so I I 've been in contact with Wu , so , probably let 's put that off till I I till I understand better , what he 's doing . It 's just a little embarrassing cause all this was in his thesis and I was on his thesis committee , and , so , I r really knew this at one time . professor b: But , I I It 's not only  Is Part of what I haven't figured out yet is is how all this goes together . professor b: squealing sound ? grad d: Or shall I just use this ? professor b: It 's probably just as easy . grad d: Hey ! grad a: I was envying you and your pocket cause I don't have one . grad e: It was a quick one , huh ? professor b: That 's why they invented " pocket T 's " . grad d: So ,  Recall that , we want to have this kind of structure in our Bayes - nets . Namely , that ,  You have these nodes that have several bands , right ? So Does  , they sort of the typical example is that , these are all a bunch of cues for something , and this is a certain effect that we 'd like to conclude . So ,  Like , let 's just look at the case when , this is actually the the final action , right ? So this is like , you know , touch , grad c: Y grad d: or grad c: E - EVA grad d: Sorry .  grad c:  grad d: Yeah , E - EVA , right ? grad c: Yeah . grad d: Enter , V View , Approach , right ? phd f: W what was this ? It i i i ehhh , i ehhh . professor b: Wri - write it out for for grad d: So , this is Yeah . So , we 'd like to take all these various cues , right ? phd f: Like the army . grad d: So this one might be , say ,  grad e: New terminology ? phd f: Yeah . grad c:  ? grad d: Well , let me pick a random one grad e: I haven't heard that before . grad d: and say ,  I don't know , it could be , like This isn't the way it really is , but let me say that , suppose someone mentioned , admission fees Ah , it takes too long . If the thing is a landmark , you know ,  then there 's another thing that says if  if it 's closed or not , at the moment . Right ? And the , problem that we were having was that , you know , given N - nodes , there 's " two to the N " Given N - nodes , and furthermore , the fact that there 's three things here , we need to specify " three times " , " two to the N " probabilities . For example , they could be " time of day " , in which case we could , say , you know , " Morning , afternoon , evening , night " . And , that 's a lot of probabilities to put here , which is kind of a pain .  Where should I put this ? So , the idea is that , Let 's call these , C - one , C - two , C - three , and C - four , and E , for Cause and Effect , I guess . Well , actually , the idea , first of all , is that each of these things has a quote - unquote distinguished state , which means that this is the state in which we don't really know anything about it . So right ? So , for example , if we don't really know if the thing is a landmark or not , Or , i if that just doesn't seem relevant , then that would be th sort of the Disting - the Distinguish state . It 's a really , you know , if there is something for the person talking about the admission fee , you know , if they didn't talk about it , that would be the Distinguish state . grad c: S so , this is a fanciful way of saying " default " ? grad d: So Yeah , yeah . grad d: So , the idea is that , you have these intermediate nodes , right ? E - one , E - two , E - three and E - four ? professor b: So , this is the Heckerman paper you 're working with ? Good . So The idea is that , each of these EI is represents what this would be if all the other ones were in the distinguish state . Right ? So , for example , suppose that the person  , suppose the thing that they talked about is a landmark . Then , this would be W The this would just represent the probability distribution of this , assuming that this cue is turned on and the other ones just didn't apply ? So , you know , if it is a landmark , and no none of the other things really ap applicable , then this would represent the probability distribution . So maybe in this case Maybe we just t k Maybe we decide that , if the thing 's a landmark and we don't know anything else , then we 're gonna conclude that ,  They want to view it with probability , you know , point four . They want to enter it with probability ,  with probability point five and they want to approach it probability point one , say Right ? So we come up with these l little tables for each of those OK . And the final thing is that ,  this is a deterministic function of these , so we don't need to specify any probabilities . We just have to , say what function this is , right ? So we can let this be ,  G of E - one comma E - two . The important point is that  There is a a a general kind of idea of shortcutting the full CPT . And So I gave eh Bhaskara a copy of this , eh sort of " ninety - two " paper . professor b: So , I u w  , yo  you Have you read it yet ? grad d: you can Yeah , you should take a look at it , I guess . professor b: And  One of the questions just come at Bhaskara is , " How much of this does JavaBayes support ? " grad d: Yeah , it 's a good question . grad d: And ,  In a sense it sup we can make it supported by , manually , entering , you know , probabilities that are one and zeros , right ? professor b: Right . So the little handout that The little thing that I sent I sent a message saying , here is a way to take One thing you could do , which is kind of s in a way , stupid , is take this deterministic function , and use it to build the CPT . So , if Ba - JavaBayes won't do it for you , grad c: Mmm .  and , what I sent out about a week ago , was an idea of how to do that , for , evidence combination . So one of one function that you could use as your " G function " is an e e Evidence - Combining . So you just take the  , if each of th if each of the ones has its own little table like that , then you could take the , strength of each of those , times its little table , and you 'd add up the total evidence for " V " , " E " , and " A " . professor b: I i i No , no But I 'm saying is There There is a w  , if y if if you decide what 's what is appropriate , is probablistic evidence combination , you can write a function that does it . It 's a pui it 's actually one of the examples he 's got in there . But , anyway , s skipping skipping the question of exactly which functions now is it clear that you might like to be able to shortcut the whole conditional probability table . grad c: in some it seems very plausible in some sense , where we will be likely to not be observe some of the stuff . That 's one of the problems , is , W Is is , Where would th Where would it all come from ? grad c: Yeah . grad d: What ? grad c: I if it 's a a a discar Discourse Initial Phrase , we will have nothing in the discourse history . A are you saying that we 'll not be able to observe certain nodes ? That 's fine . The f the the the Bayes - nets in general are quite good at saying , " if you have no current information about this variable just take the prior for that . So , if you don't have any information about the discourse , you just use your priors of of whatever eh the discourse  , eh , basically whatever w it 's Probabilistically , whatever it would be . But the other problem is , how do you fill in all these numbers ? And I think that 's the one he was getting at . So , specifically in this case you have to f have this many numbers , grad e: Yeah . grad d: whereas in this case you just have to have three for this , three for this , three for this . grad d: So you have to have just three N ? So , this is much smaller than that . professor b:  grad e: So , you don't need da data enough to cover  , nearly as much stuff . grad a: So , really , i What a A Noisy - OR seems to kind of " neural - net - acize " these Bayes - nets ? professor b: Eh well to some No , no . So , " Noisy - OR " is a funny way of referring to this , because the Noisy - OR is only one instance . So Eh  grad a: Well , my point was more that we just eh With the neural net , right , eh , things come in , you have a function that combines them and professor b: Yeah , it it Tha - that 's true . It is a is also more neural - net - like , although  , it isn't necessarily sum  , s you know , sum of weights or anything like that . professor b:  i You could have , like the Noisy - OR function , really is one that 's essentially says , take the max . So And , I thi I think that 's the standard way people get around the  There are a couple other ones . But ,  The I think we definitely I think it 's a great idea tha to to pursue that . It  you you can always  see easily that that I 'm not grasping everything correctly , but what seemed attractive to me in im  in the last discussion we had , was that we find out a means of of getting these point four , point five , point one , of C - four , not because , you know , A is a Landmark or not , but we we we label this whatever object type , and if it 's a garden , it 's point three , point four , point two . If it 's , a town hall , it 's point two , point three , point five . And we don't want to write this down necessarily every time for something but ,  let 's see . grad d: It 'll be students Where else would it be stored ? That 's the question . So , i is Well , let me say something , guys , cuz there 's not There 's a pretty point about this we might as well get in right now . professor b: So that  , if you know about it let 's say , a particular town hall that , it 's one that is a monument , then , that would be stored there . If you don't , you look up the hierarchy , Eh so , you you you may or So , then you 'd have this little vector of , you know , Approach Mode or EVA Mode . professor b: or , link to or but but in any case i View it logically as being in the ontology . professor b: And , if yo As I say , if you know about a specific object , you put it there . So , when we get to Wu , The - e We 'll see w what he says about that . professor b: And , then if you If it isn't there , it 's higher , and if you don't know anything except that it 's a b it 's it 's a building , then up at the highest thing , you have the pr what amounts to a prior . If you don't know anything else about a building , you just take whatever your crude approximation is up at that level , grad d: Right . professor b: So , that 's a very pretty relationship between these local vectors and the ontology . And it seems to me the obvious thing to do , unless we find a reason to do something different . professor b: Does this make sense to you ? grad d: So professor b: Bhask - ? grad d: Yeah . So , we are but we we 're not doing the ontology , so we have to get to whoever is doing the u ultimately , professor b: Indeed . So , that 's another thing we 're gonna need to do , is is , to , either grad d: we have to get them to professor b: We 're gonna need some way to either get a p tag in the ontology , or add fields , or some way to associate Or , w It may be that all we can do is , some of our own hash tables that it Th - the th you know , there 's always a way to do that . It 's a just a question of grad a: Yeah , hash on object name to , you know , the probabilities or whatever . And , so , i  grad c: But it 's ,  Well , it strikes me as a What For If we get the mechanism , that will be sort of the wonderful part . And then , how to make it work is is the second part , in the sense that  , m the guy who was doing the ontology eh , eh , s ap apologized that i it will take him another through two to three days because they 're having really trouble getting the upper level straight , and right now . The reason is , given the craw bet  , the the the projects that all carry their own taxonomy and , on all history , they 're really trying to build one top level ontology ft that covers all the EML projects , and that 's , sort of a tough cookie , a little bit tougher than they figured . But , nevertheless , it 's going to be there by n by , next Monday and I will show you what 's what some examples from that for towers , and stuff . And , what I don't think is ever going to be in the ontology , is sort of , you know , the likelihood of , eh , people entering r town halls , and looking at town halls , and approaching town halls , especially since we are b dealing with a case - based , not an instance - based ontology . So , there will be nothing on on that town hall , or on the Berkeley town hall , or on the Heidelberg town hall , it 'll just be information on town halls . professor b: Well , they they they How ar What are they gonna do with instances ? grad c: But what professor b: you y grad c: Well , that 's Hhh .  , th the first , they had to make a design question , " do we take ontologies that have instances ? or just one that does not , that just has the types ? " professor b: OK . grad c: And , so , since the d decision was on types , on a d simply type - based , we now have to hook it up to instances .  this is professor b: But what i What is SmartKom gonna do about that ? grad c: one professor b: Cuz , they have instances all the time . grad c: Yeah , but the ontology is really not a SmartKom thing , in in and of itself . professor b: I understand , but is anybody doing anything about it ? grad c:  professor b: OK . grad c: No , but th the r eh I th I still think that there is enough information in there . So , in a sense , " I " used as Institutions for some s in some sense or the other . When we see what people have done , it may turn out that the easiest thing to do is to build a a separate thing that that just pools i i Like , i i it it may be , that , the the instance w That we have to build our own instance , things , that , with their types , grad d: Yeah , it 's Right , we can just assume professor b: and then it goes off to the ontology once you have its type . So we build a little data structure And so what we would do in that case , is , in our instance gadget have our E V And if we d there isn't one we 'd get the type and then have the E V As for the type . professor b: So , we 'd have our own little things so that whenever we needed one , we 'd just use the ontology to get the type , grad d:   professor b: and then would hash or whatever we do to say , " ah ! grad d:   professor b: If it 's that type of thing , and we want its EVA vector , pppt - pppt ! it 's that . And then But , the combination functions , and whether we can put those in Java Bayes , and all that sort of stuff , is ,  is the bigger deal . grad a: We could just steal the classes in JavaBayes and then interface to them with our own code . grad d:  professor b: Well , I me ye eh , yeah , the grad d: That requires understanding the classes in JavaBayes , I guess .  , you 've been around enough to  Just ? grad a: Well , it depends on professor b: there 's this huge package which which may or may not be consistent and you know . It 's b It It 's an inter sort of a kind of a it The thing is , it 's kind of an interpreter and i i it expects its data structures to be in a given form , and if you say , " hey , we 're gonna make a different kind of data structure to stick in there " grad a: Well , no , but that just means there 's a protocol , right ? That you could professor b: It may or may not . That 's the question is " to what extent does it allow us to put in these G functions ? " And I don't know . grad a: Well , no , but  What I  the So you could have four different Bayes - nets that you 're running , and then run your own write your own function that would take the output of those four , and make your own " G function " , is what I was saying . professor b: Yeah , that 's fine if it 's if it comes only at the end . But suppose you want it embedded ? grad a: Well , then you 'd have to break all of your Bayes - nets into smaller Bayes - nets , with all the professor b: Oh , that Yeah , that 's a truly horrible way to do d it . But , at that point you may say , " hey , Java Bayes isn't the only package in town . Let 's see if there 's another package that 's , eh , more civilized about this . " grad d:  professor b: Now , Srini is worth talking to on this , grad d: Mmm . professor b: cuz he said that he actually did hack some combining functions into But he doesn't remember at least when I talked to him , he didn't remember whether it was an e an easy thing , a natural thing , or whether he had to do some violence to it to make it work . I don't see why the , combining f functions have to be directly hacked into  , they 're used to create tables so we can just make our own little functions that create tables in XML . professor b: Well , I say that 's one way to do it , is is to just convert it int into a into a C P T that you zip It 's blown up , and is a it 's ,  it 's huge , but it doesn't require any data fitting or complication . I don't think  , the fact that it blown u blows up is a huge issue in the sense that  , OK . So say it blows up , right ? So there 's , like , the you know , ten , f ten , fifteen , things . It said , " Here 's the way you 'd take the logical f G function and turn it into a CPT . So , I will , e e before next week , @ @ p push push some more on on this stuff that Dekai Wu did , and try to understand it .  , you 'll make a couple of more copies of the Heckerman paper to give to people ? grad d: p Sure . And I I 'll I 'll think s through this , eh getting EVA vectors dynamically out of ontologies one more time because I s I I I 'm not quite sure whether we all think of the same thing or not , here . professor b: Alright , great ! And , Robert , thank you for coming in under He he 's been sick , Robert . grad a: I was thinking maybe we should just cough into the microphone and see if they can't th see if they can handle it
marketing: industrial designer: project manager: then we considered some design options with how it should look , we discussed an iPod-like button system which , we haven't concluded but we're Right ,  So , if you all have presentations to do , we can see what where you've come from our last time . Mostly by consulting remote control diagrams from the internet and also by incorporating design ideas from the last project meeting .  , I assume we'll be custom designing our case , probably a hard plastic or some other material case , to protect the remote and the locator . And we'll need to custom desi design a circuit board , because the circuit board has to take the button input and send it to the output so you have to design that each time . But once we come up with a design we'll send it to the circuit people and they'll just print it out . The infrared L_E_D_ is actually gonna be included in the circuit board that comes with it . And al we also need a beeper or buzzer or other sort of noise thing for locating the remote .  , I'd recommend against titanium because it can only be used in the flat cases and it's really heavy .  , and the rubber case requires rubber buttons , so if we definitely want plastic buttons , we shouldn't have a rubber case . project manager: And why not wood ? industrial designer: And , project manager: And why not wood ? industrial designer:  ?  , well we can use wood .  and also we should note that if we want an iPod-style wheel button , it's gonna require a m qu slightly more expensive chip . We can't use the minimal chip , we need the next higher grade , which is called regular . marketing: can I do next ? 'Cause I have to say something about the material project manager:  . Right , I have been searching the current trends , both on the web and via fashion-watchers , and the findings are that the first thing to aim for is a fashion  , fancy look and feel .  , fancy look and feel goes far beyond the functionality of the thing , but I suppose that is included in in the ease of use .  , our fashion-watchers in Milan and Paris have decided , well noticed , that f the fruit and vegetable theme is the is the current trend project manager: user interface: project manager: industrial designer: marketing: and and therefore  we need to go for that if we want , you know , wh whatever our motto is . And also go for a spongy feel , so the the question of our technology whate is Industrial Designer . As to the material should be limited to I don't know how spongy it can be , should discuss this together , I don't know how spongy can be achieved but apparently that's the way to go . I I have been thinking about this fruit and vegetable thing and I prefer fruits to vegetables , industrial designer: marketing: but that's just a personal opinion . user interface: marketing: I think project manager: marketing: I think people like to have a fruit instead of a vegetables in their sitting room . industrial designer: marketing:  those are just suggestions and also we need to decide whether this should be printed , so that still has to do with the material discuss should we print the fruit stuff , or should the actual remote look like a fruit ? project manager: industrial designer: marketing: and finally again with the spongy . It has to be technologically innovative so maybe again our Industrial Designer should look into that or find come up with a solution that's better than mine .  , yeah , to summarise these are the points that need to be  , touched in order to get a good decision , and hopefully our User Interface has more to say about the matter . project manager: marketing: industrial designer: user interface: I actually wasn't aware of the new trends in electronics project manager: industrial designer: user interface: and and  marketing: Neither was I . Trying we're gonna try to talk about ,  what kind of  how people are actually going to be using this iPod-ish remote control , based on fruit vegetable design . project manager: user interface: And , basically , so , this is a touched ba a touch-based graphical interface system .  , kind of  I assume , are we still on the screen idea ? project manager: Oh we s hadn't discussed it last time . user interface: 'Cause if we're gonna have to ha if we have this it just seems like in order to have someone going around and using the  the wheel project manager: You need a screen for it ? user interface: you it seems like you would need a screen . industrial designer: You need a screen with music because you're looking for a specific song , like you know that band or whatever . So , b you you're gonna have to switch to like D_V_D_ and like other things like that , aren't you ? project manager: We're , we're actually not having D_V_D_ , user interface: Are we project manager: that was one of th I I was industrial designer: Yeah . marketing: That correct ? user interface: So anyway if well we just we need to Okay so if we're not gonna have a screen I think I was thinking okay . So basically it's just gonna be a wheel then ? And you're just gonna  I think you're gonna have to have some kind of a right . marketing: Graphical interface ? user interface: Yeah like you're g marketing:  on the you can have it on the telly though . user interface: yeah like you're gonna have to be able to switch to like a mode where you can okay we're not choosing that , I guess . But like choose channel control , like if you wa Because people aren't gonna be able to have like , you know , channels one two three four five six seven eight nine . user interface: So that people seems to be well project manager: You've Yeah , I know what you're saying , you have to user interface: You know . So  I guess that's wh why I was thinking you may need to have some kind of a screen because So that people can go arou go back and forth and choose if or or then again if you just I guess I c I can see like some kind of a thing where like you sort of have like the number come up on the T_V_ like what channel you're on . user interface: You can just scroll and you can just get to like five or like twelve or marketing: Yeah , yeah . project manager: But but imagine someone with s industrial designer: My flatmates actually had one with a wheel , and it it did show up on the T_V_ . user interface: I oh yeah ? project manager: But i what if you have satellite and you have like two hundred channels . Then to get to channel one eighty nine you have to industrial designer: user interface: 'Cause you'll have to like marketing: Yeah . user interface: Yeah if you do , it w so it would have to be you  so you basically just kinda need to figure out like what kind of , you know , range we need to have on the wheel , and  So you're either you're you know , th you're either doing this motion to like control the channels or like once once you stop that , you know , you can like tap for , different project manager: Yeah . user interface: whatchamacallits , different  , you know , functions like volume or , like you can tap just to get to different channels . Like if you just wanted to go to like from five to six you could tap or someth project manager: Right . user interface: And then there's also the concern about you know  how do you get to the menu if you wanna change the brightness of your television , or if you want to  you know switch around , I don't know , like , these different modes like turn on the timer or like something something like that , project manager: Yeah  with that many options , you'd  I'd think that the screen would be better , user interface: like project manager: because you could have that menu option , sort of user interface: I would think so too , like So  and it seems it w it does seem a little silly to have this screen if you hardly are ever using it , you know , because project manager: Yeah . user interface: but then again it would it does make kind of if the screen's sort of just like an option that , like , is just there and you're not really using it , that's kind of project manager: Yeah . industrial designer: You have to get a an advanced chip if you wanna have a screen in , which is more expensive than the regular chip , which is more expensive than the minimal . So then basically it has to have some way to get to get to a mode on the television where you're doing ,  project manager:  . user interface: You can get to you know , you can Like maybe it'll be that central button that , like , then you hit that and then you can it brings up like the menu on the T_V_ marketing: Yeah , yeah , yeah . user interface: and you can just scroll around , like , to do the timer , to do the marketing: Yeah . project manager: So the T_V_ is the screen , that yeah user interface: yeah , yeah . industrial designer: marketing: you can just take theirs and just user interface: Yeah , well we don't want the screen I guess , project manager: Yeah . user interface: but  'cause that just it does seem like , it that would be , like , incredibly expensive , but I dunno , and then so , it just im really all you need is , like , this little wheel then , and you can control everything . What if  , if you're thinking of the design of it now , like the a you know , physical attributes , user interface: Yeah . project manager: and you just have this , it's like just a long silver thing , industrial designer: project manager: or whatever we're thinking .  are you you gonna have any buttons on that besides power and this thing ? Or user interface: It doesn't seem that you would need anything besides pow  and the power button could even be like hold down the menu button for like longer than one second and it turns on the T_V_ . user interface: Like , I think we're looking at something that could be , like like even maybe like a cir I'm f I'm seeing almost like a circular sort of like handheld like thing . user interface:  how do how do I'm not really Like when I use an iPod , I end up just kind of using my index finger to like control it . So project manager: Yeah , I've seen some people just going like that with their thumb , yeah . industrial designer: W when we had the wheely remote control , we it was on the top I think , if you held it like that . project manager: But , were there buttons on there as well ? user interface: Yeah , so industrial designer: Yeah well it had the wheely thing and then it had those eighteen different buttons that I don't know what they do . user interface: Like , I d  , you you want it to be large enough that you can project manager: What if , you had like a b a cover that went over buttons that you don't use very much ? Like you so you could slide it up if you needed to like change the contrast or something like that ? So the options are there but they're not in interfering with the design and the practicality of it . user interface: But can't you just get project manager: Do do you know what I'm talking about though ? Like , yeah just something industrial designer: Yeah . Yeah like maybe something on the side where you slip a panel down and it's got a whole bunch of user interface: K marketing: Well you can have it on the settings , project manager: Yeah , that you can flip over , yeah , yeah . marketing: no ? user interface: Yeah , But , do you need that ? If if you can get to , you know if so long as you're able to bring up the menu on the T_V_ screen . project manager: is is if w I user interface: That keeps it project manager: if we can do this , that'd probably be user interface: really Yeah . user interface: So project manager: So I guess we have to look into the , like , the programming , how this how they actually programme these things , and if that's user interface: Mean industrial designer: Oh how they make the menu show up on the T_V_ ? project manager: yeah . industrial designer: I believe it's ins it's gotta be inside the T_V_ , not inside the remote . user interface: It sounds like this remote's going to be purchased separately from the television , industrial designer: marketing: project manager: industrial designer: Well they usually are . user interface: which is a little industrial designer: Well user interface: My I've never bought just a remote , like , so I don't I don't really know . project manager: user interface: So ,  but  it's I've never had a hard time with like my remotes , like bringing up the menu screen if you need to like change the date or whatever , you know . industrial designer: Yeah , it most of the ones we've had have had the menu button , 'cause it's not like you need to have a button access to like change the contrast or something . Well I guess we have to you know think about But  you just basically need the output signal you know to be able to bring it up . marketing: But also if you have it on the screen you can actually write everything out , because the problem with buttons is you like , they have these sort of abbreviations and codes that you're supposed to understand , user interface: Yeah . project manager: you don't know they mean , yeah , it's like industrial designer: marketing: and I never get it . user interface: So , but marketing: So user interface: oh , you mean if we have this screen like the iPod screen ? marketing: Well on the telly . So yeah I think , I think I think the touch-based graphical interface is a really  cool idea industrial designer: user interface: because you know it is so obnoxious to like have to push those like okay now I hit this you know , you have your little guide out and you're like , hit this button twice , like to activate the date . And it is trendy , the iPods are really hot right now , so project manager: B Yeah . marketing: Did you did you get that pc picture on did they provide you with that picture on the web ? user interface: yeah , by web research , yeah , so marketing: That's quite interesting . What are we going to do about this vegetable thing that I'm dreading ? project manager: Oh god . industrial designer: one of the material options is a sort of rubber that's in like those stress ball things . user interface: Yeah , c that's e that would be kind of oh , you know , usually like the touch pad things are kind of a hard plastic typ mouse type , you know , thing . user interface: But what if we ha what if we had like a spongy sort of like stress balley kinda industrial designer: project manager: marketing: industrial designer: user interface: so you're like industrial designer: Yeah I think it could work . user interface: Or what if we integrated the the  the f what if the whole thing about the fruit and vegetables marketing: user interface: we somehow made it tactilely fash you know , we c tapped into that , so like it feels like industrial designer: Don't think I'd want it to feel like a banana . marketing: If it's a small thing , you c instead of creating an object for it that looks like a banana , industrial designer: marketing: which frankly I'm not particularly fond of , project manager: user interface: marketing:  you could just have covers and then your mobile f it's like a mobile phone thing . marketing: You know you had there was a time when they had all these different covers for mobiles . industrial designer: You could do like the computers where they have like the grapefruit , apple machine and they have like the blueberry , like all the colours are named after fruits . project manager: marketing: And it could the colour can fit your sitting room , industrial designer: marketing: so if you have red sitting room you can have strawberry , and then if you have a green one you can have well I don't know . project manager: So what if what user interface: So I think project manager: this is user interface: yeah , colours . If you have like that stress ball material kind of as what you're actually holding in your hand , so like what you're feeling is comfortable , and then there's more of a hard plastic thing where that thing is . project manager: And on that hard plastic thing you can change either the colour or the fruit or vegetable that's on there .  project manager:  how are you how are you all envisioning by what we've just the feedback we've just got about the marketing: Maybe a ball . That you can p user interface: That's in the shape of a fruit , like a project manager: industrial designer: marketing: well I see you're thinking , it's weird , you're thinking the opposite of me 'cause you're thinking you change the the hard bit project manager: Yeah . marketing: and I'm thinking how do you change the hard would you put a  sticker sort of ? Because I was thinking if you have a cover for the squashy bit , like a project manager: This is just Okay . Yeah I was thinking of getting a cover for project manager: That see I was thinking this s marketing: Which is cheaper . project manager: I was thinking this bit here would be the cover and like that's your actual thing . project manager: And like this you could have like you could have like cherries and things around there . industrial designer: So you're holding a squishy ball project manager: 'cause the way you were describing the the iPod and the thi the roll thingy industrial designer: and then it has a user interface: It's like it has to be s project manager: It's almost like your thumb is farther up , user interface: yeah . project manager: so if if you could squish it lower then industrial designer: Yeah I guess so . So it wouldn't be very big in either like how big ? This big , and then you just do that , I suppose . user interface: What if , yeah , what if the squishy , oh so so you're saying the squishy part's like detachable , and you can so so maybe one you know you can have like the broccoli squishy thing , and then you could have like the banana squishy thing project manager: industrial designer: marketing: user interface: and you could get you could have your choice , you know ? marketing: Well just a li I can't des like condom thingy , like a a cover . project manager: industrial designer: marketing: But well the question is , which one's easiest to change and we can just contact our relevant department for that , project manager: Yeah . marketing: and just see what the cost is for covering that or covering that , user interface: Yeah , yeah . marketing: and for now we can do two prototypes maybe and then hi try and ask users what the best is , user interface: Yeah .  I think  and I think the handhe I think the handheld part is definitely So you could make that into the fruit and vegetable part . marketing: If it's a bit like those juggling balls , you can change shape according to your to the way you hold it . marketing: If it's got sand in it maybe , or something , you it it just moulds to your hand . So where are the fruit and vegetables now ? project manager: industrial designer: I guess they would be either in the colour of that plastic face on the front , or in the colour of the squishy thing underneath . marketing: And the rest is the company the company colour's silver ? project manager: It was , yeah , silver and yellow . It l it looks like I don't industrial designer: user interface: We could promote the banana one . project manager:  that's another question , where are we gonna we we should have the logo somewhere on it . Then you need to have the other part just be sort of a single unit that you can snap off . user interface: Yeah , I think ,  it'd be interesting to have the b the squishy bit . The part that you , yeah , can change into the different , you know , trendy vegetables and fruits . project manager: I don't know what the rest of my notes mean because they were made for me .  , so what d but what do we know about energy ?  we're gonna use batteries right ? And industrial designer:  we actually had an option of batteries , solar power , and  a dynamo , project manager: industrial designer: which is something I don't know what it is . It's the en it's like if if something moves , when it moves , it stores energy . Yeah , the other one was the other one was a kinetic thing where you'd basically have to wind it yourself . industrial designer: We could have talked about doing a wind-up or a dynamo or a solar power . But dynamo the the fact with dynamo is , the moment you move it , it c it creates energy on its own . So if you throw it , it's gonna store loads of energy , and you don't need to buy a battery 'cause they're quite f I find them annoying . industrial designer: Didn't have enough data to actually marketing: Does anyone have costs on the on the web ? industrial designer: All it said was it gave sort of relative , some chips are more expensive than others , sort of things . project manager: What does chip on print mean ? industrial designer: for things like remote controls , they stamp out a chip , marketing: project manager: -huh . industrial designer: But it's not like a computer , you can't like reprogramme your remo remote controls , it's like stamped onto the chip . And case ?  I guess that's what we've been talking about , industrial designer: Case is what we were discussing yeah . thinking of like syntactic case and thi industrial designer: project manager:  let's see . project manager: talk about ? Oh when we move on , you two are going to be playing with play-dough . industrial designer: project manager: and working on the look and feel of the design and user interface design . Does it matter that I end early ? marketing: I it's strange because project manager: How how early is it ? I didn't get a pop-up thing that said {disfmarker}
anthony rota (nipissingtimiskaming, lib.)): I call the meeting to order.  Welcome to the third meeting of the House of Commons Special Committee on the COVID-19 Pandemic. Pursuant to the order of reference of Monday, April20, the committee is meeting for the purposes of considering ministerial announcements, allowing members to present petitions, and questioning ministers of the crown, including the Prime Minister, in respect of the COVID-19 pandemic. I understand there's an agreement to observe a moment of silence in memory of the six members of the Canadian Armed Forces who lost their lives last Wednesday in a helicopter crash off the coast of Greece. Colleagues, we meet today to continue our discussion about how our country is dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic. As we do, Canadians, like everyone around the world, are doing their best to live their lives until things improve. Meanwhile, as we look towards the future, I believe that it is also important to remember our past and to continue to mark the important moments in our shared history. Andrea McCrady, is performing a special recital to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the liberation of the Netherlands by the Canadian Forces. In May 1945, Canadian Forces played a major role in liberating the Dutch people from Nazi occupation. May 5 is now a national holiday in the Netherlands that commemorates the event and the great friendship that now exists between our two countries. Let me remind you that, as in the House or in committee, members may not take photographs of their colleagues or film the proceedings. In order to facilitate the work of our interpreters and ensure orderly meetings, I will outline a few rules. If you look at the bottom, you have a little flag that indicates whether it's English or French, and that's how we will be speaking.  I would like to remind members that petitions presented during a meeting of the special committee must already have been certified by the clerk of petitions.  In addition, to ensure that the petition is considered to have been properly presented, the certificate of the petition and each page of the petition for petitions certified in a previous Parliament should be emailed to the committee no later than 6 p.m. It includes removing the mandatory 10-day reflection period and the number of required witnesses who will witness a person's consent. The petitioners urge the House of Commons to immediately discontinue the removal of safeguards for people requesting euthanasia, and to put in place additional measures to protect vulnerable people. Petitioners call on members of the House, and hopefully the Senate as well, to support Bill S-204, which would make it a criminal offence for a person to go abroad and receive an organ for which there has not been consent. It would also create provisions under which a person could be made inadmissible to Canada if they had been involved in organ harvesting or trafficking. I want to remind all the members that there are specific headsets that have been mandated to all of us. If you don't have one, please talk to your IT ambassador and they will get one to you as quickly as possible. The reason for them is not so much for what you hear, but that our interpreters are working and there are work conditions that really make it difficult. Part of that is not having the appropriate boom on your headset, which will make it very difficult for them to hear and interpret for our members. The petitioners have noted that there are approximately 60 indigenous languages in Canada and that 2019, last year, was declared by the UN to be the year of indigenous languages. They draw attention to article 13 of the UNDRIP and to the TRC's calls to action numbers 13 to 16. Fundamentally, they call upon the Government of Canada to recognize indigenous languages as being official languages of Canada and to have each language recognized nationally, with implementations on regional and provincial levels, acknowledging that many regions have different languages. Chair, I am proud to present a petition on behalf of one of my constituents, Myles Lynch of St. Myles lives with cystic fibrosis and has had three lung transplants in the last five years, and he's only 22 years old. One thing Myles has been advocating for is the creation of a national opt-out program for organ donation. I am proud to have this certified today, with 1,318 signatures, asking the Standing Committee on Health to launch a study into the feasibility of the creation of a national opt-out program. I give kudos to Myles not only for his strength personally but also for his advocacy for others and for saving lives in our country by advocating for a better and an improved organ donation system. Chair, I'm very pleased to present this certified petition on behalf of several dozen residents of Toronto, Mississauga and Brampton, Ontario, who add their voices to those of the thousands upon thousands of Canadians who have signed similar petitions. Given that Canadians are living through unprecedented, catastrophic climate events, and at the same time our society, as you know, is suffering from worsening social and economic inequalitieshalf of Canadian families are only $200 away from insolvency in any given monthand particularly given the pandemic that we are currently experiencing, these petitioners are calling on the Government of Canada to support motion M-1, a made-in-Canada green new deal that I am presenting in front of the House of Commons. It calls on Canada to take bold and rapid action to tackle the climate emergency, and to put in place a shift to a clean and renewable energy economy. Chair, it's an honour to table a petition on behalf of constituents from CourtenayAlberni. Over 12,000 Canadians have died over the last four years due to fentanyl-poisoned sources. They cite that the current war on drugs has been costly and grossly ineffective; that it has resulted in widespread stigma towards addiction and against those who use illicit drugs; and that criminalization of particular substances has resulted in the establishment of a drug trade that now trafficks dangerous and lethal products such as fentanyl. They are citing that regulating to ensure safe sources, with proper measures and bylaws, will reduce the criminal element associated with street drugs. They are calling on the Government of Canada to declare the current opioid overdose and fenanyl poisoning crisis a national public health emergency under the Emergencies Act. They are calling for the government to reform current drug policy to decriminalize personal possession, as has been done in Portugal and other countries, and to create with urgency and immediacy a system to provide safe and unadulterated access to substances so that people who use substances experimentally, recreationally or chronically are not at imminent risk of overdose due to a contaminated source. Chair, I'm presenting a petition today that contains the concerns of Canadians in my riding with the government's approach to firearms legislation and regulation. The petition highlights that the Liberal government's December 5, 2019, Speech from the Throne contains numerous inaccuracies about current firearms legislation and regulation; that the term military-style assault rifles is a political phrase undefined in Canadian law; that municipalities are constitutionally unable to enact criminal law to ban handguns in their jurisdictions; that the experts, including chiefs of police, agree that banning firearms and requiring law-abiding gun owners to follow more unnecessary red tape will not increase public safety; that the majority of guns used in violent crimes are smuggled into Canada from the United States; and that the Liberal government continues to target law-abiding firearms owners instead of the gangs, drug traffickers and illegal gun traffickers responsible for violence in our communities. The petitioners in MissionMatsquiFraser Canyon are calling on the government to stop targeting law-abiding firearms owners; to cancel all plans to confiscate firearms legally owned by federally licensed, RCMP-vetted Canadians; and to focus our limited resources on anti-gang enforcement, on reducing the involvement of at-risk youth and gangs, on mental health and on providing the Canada Border Services Agency with the tools they need to do their job effectively. I would like to remind honourable members that no member shall be recognized for more than five minutes at a time and that members may split their time with one or more members by so indicating to the chair. I want to again remind honourable members to use the boom on the official headsets so that everything runs smoothly, not only for ourselves but also for the interpreters. pierre paul-hus (charlesbourghaute-saint-charles, cpc): Thank you, Mr.Chair. Although we are right in the middle of a pandemic and the government has agreed to set aside all parliamentary business in order to concentrate solely on eliminating the virus in Canada and its impacts, the Prime Minister is deceiving Canadians by introducing measures to punish law-abiding firearm owners. justin trudeau (prime minister): Mr.Chair, I feel that all Canadians were affected by the massacre in Nova Scotia. During the last election campaign, we promised to ban military-style assault weapons, and that is exactly what we have done. It is a shame that, once more, the Conservatives do not want to strengthen gun control in the country. However, I would like to know whether he considers that, with this order in council, organized crime, street gangs and other criminals are simply going to turn in their weapons. We are doing other things to eliminate or restrict handguns in our municipalities, to strengthen the control at our borders, and to implement other measures. member speak of those measures, because we are going to work together in the House to strengthen gun control. I hope that the Conservative Party will be part of that discussion in a positive way, in order to keep Canadians safe. pierre paul-hus: Mr.Chair, I can simply say to the Prime Minister that the Conservative Party has always been committed to battling criminals, not law-abiding citizens. Speaking of criminals, we know that, even before the pandemic, the Prime Minister had asked the Parole Board of Canada to release prisoners more easily and more quickly. The Minister of Public Safety told us that the people were approaching the end of their sentences or were older, but we are learning in the media that some dangerous criminals are being released. justin trudeau: The protection, the safety and the health of all Canadians are important for the government. This is why we have taken additional measures in our correctional services to ensure that guards and inmates are protected. We have indeed opened the doors to some more speedy releases, but only in very specific cases that present little or no danger for Canadians. pierre paul-hus: So is the Prime Minister confirming to us that no dangerous criminals have been precipitously released so that they do not have to experience COVID-19 within the walls? right hon. justin trudeau: There are very strict rules and principles to ensure that people posing a threat to society are not released. Is Canada going to stand by its allies in the Five Eyes and demand that the Chinese government be completely transparent? right hon. justin trudeau: We continue to stand in solidarity with our allies, including the Five Eyes, as they have stood in solidarity with Canada in terms of the two Canadians who have been unjustly detained for a long time in China. In the coming months and years, we expect to obtain answers to all our questions about the origin of this pandemic, including questions that are important for China. At the same time, we are going to work hard to ensure that all Canadians have the equipment and the protection they need to get through this pandemic. yves-franois blanchet (beloeilchambly, bq): Thank you, Mr.Chair. For some days, discussions have been going on between people from the Bloc Qubcois and people from the government with a view to collaboratively coming up with a proposal for seniors in Quebec and Canada. The gist of our proposal is to temporarily increase the old age security by about $25per week, or $110per month. The discussion has been going on for some time and it's a proposal that we made in the election campaign. Given that impatience, I realized I should not be the one answering them, it should be the Prime Minister. So here is my question for the Prime Minister: what are you doing to seek a solution that will increase the purchasing power of seniors in Quebec and Canada in the very short term? right hon. justin trudeau: Clearly, seniors need support and significant services from us because of COVID-19. Our priority was to implement income replacement benefits for workers who have lost their jobs because of COVID-19. The most vulnerable seniors are going to receive reimbursement of the GST, which will help them very quickly. We have also channelled $9million through the United Way, to help the most vulnerable seniors. I am very pleased that we have been able to work with other parliamentarians, including those in the Bloc Qubcois, to hear these concerns and to find the best way to help seniors in the short term. In terms of the pandemic, they have concerns about their physical security, but also about their financial security. yves-franois blanchet: In the last few hours, the Prime Minister has indicated that he could need the cooperation of other parties, including the Bloc Qubcois, on a completely different matter. We are very open to that discussion, but we want the same openness when we are asking for something to serve the people of Quebec. Seniors in my constituency, as in any other of the 338constituencies, are asking what we are doing. When will there be something for them? I want to be able to give them an answer of some kind. justin trudeau: There will be announcements in the coming days on the way in which we will be able to help seniors, particularly the most vulnerable seniors. There are horror stories, whether about the CHSLDs, or about our most vulnerable seniors across the country. There are seniors who are alone, seniors who are afraid of falling ill without ever seeing their grandchildren or their children again. We have to be there for those who belong to that great generation that fought for us during the second world war. Chair, every day I hear from people who are struggling to pay their bills and to keep a roof over their head. Instead of making sure that Canadians get the help they need, the government has created complicated programs that are still letting people fall through the cracks. If the Prime Minister won't commit to a universal benefit, will he at least commit to removing the restrictive eligibility criteria that are leaving the most vulnerable people behind? right hon. Chair, we knew, when this pandemic hit, that we needed to help Canadians who were suffering from coast to coast to coast, particularly the most vulnerable. That is why we moved forward rapidly with the Canada emergency response benefit, which has helped over seven million individual Canadians and has made a huge difference. We had to move very quickly to get this money out to people, and that is exactly what we did. That is why since that moment, we have continually worked on reaching out to the most vulnerable and supporting them as well. However, because she didn't make $5,000 last year, when the pandemic hit she didn't qualify for any benefits. Chair, our focus throughout this crisis has been on helping the most vulnerable with targeted measures that will lift Canadians out of poverty and will support them. Over the past five years, we've lifted over a million people out of poverty in this country, and we've continued to put the most vulnerable at the heart of everything we're doing. At the same time, we will continue to look for more ways to help even more than the seven million Canadians who successfully receive the CERB. We recognize there's more to do, and we will continue trying to do everything we can in this unprecedented situation. Chair, the government is weirdly committed to eligibility criteria that result in regular people not getting the support they need, but not so committed to criteria for corporations and billionaires who get our help. If a company is cheating the public, using offshore tax havens not to pay its fair share, it should not be eligible for government bailouts or benefits. Other countries, like Poland, Denmark and France, have made this commitment, and if they can do it, so can we. Will he commit now that if a company has money in offshore tax havens, it will not receive public funds? right hon. Chair, the measures we've put forward are focused on helping workers who lose their jobs, regardless of the companies they work for. It is a shame to hear the NDP, which used to be the party of workers, choosing to judge workers by which multinational they work for. We have moved forward with a wage subsidy such that the employers are obliged to pass every single penny on to the workers. That is help for the workers, and that has been our focus all the way through: ordinary Canadians who need support because they are unable to work because of COVID-19. I want to remind honourable members that we're trying to stay within committee rules, which state that the length of a question and the length of an answer should be approximately the same amount of time. She has about 45 seconds left, and hopefully that's about half and half for the question and the answer. My community was facing a crisis long before the pandemic hit, and now people who are living on the streets or in parks don't have the luxury of following public health advice and just staying home. In Victoria, the province and the municipality have stepped up with solutions to house people, at least for the short term, in local hotels. Will the federal government respond to this immediate crisis and provide the needed investments in long-term, stable housing? the chair: The right honourable Prime Minister, in 25 seconds or less, please. Working with partners, we have reduced poverty by over a million people in this country, but there is more to do. We recognize that during this pandemic there's even more to do for vulnerable Canadians, and we are partnering with orders of government to make sure that happens. jol godin (portneufjacques-cartier, cpc): A point of order, Mr.Chair. Could we please check so that I can hear in French what the Prime Minister is saying? the chair: Okay. I'm speaking English right now and I'm on the English toggle at the bottom of the screen. It does create a bit of a disjoint when we're speaking, but it's the way to get around that so we have interpretation that works for everyone. Chair, as this is our first opportunity to meet in any forum, I want to take this opportunity to express my condolences to the families of the brave men and women who lost their lives in the helicopter crash. I know that I speak for all parliamentarians when I extend our sympathy to their families and loved ones. Chair, I want to raise with the Prime Minister an issue that I've raised several times before, and that is a gap in the wage subsidy program. Those companies separately would qualify for the wage subsidy, but because of rules that the government designed, together they do not. Even though collectively they have experienced a massive drop in revenue and would otherwise be eligible, so far they've been unable to get confirmation that they will be able to access the program. Will the Prime Minister be able to deliver some good news to people who work for Brandt Tractor all across the country? right hon. justin trudeau: I thank the honourable member for his question and for his advocacy for his community and businesses in his riding. As I told him when we spoke directly, Finance officials have been directly in contact with the company in his riding. We recognize that there are particular elements in regard to this company that are challenging around application for the wage subsidy, but I know that Finance officials are working very hard to try to make sure that everyone who needs the subsidy gets it, so that the workers in his community can get the support they need. andrew scheer: The Prime Minister knows that there are many companies across the country that fall into this category as well, so we're hoping for some good news. Just flagging the time and date, it is well into May now and important decisions have to be made in very short order. There are other aspects of the government's plans to help get people through this crisis that are also causing people to fall through the cracks. As provinces start to open up, many companies are going to be faced with a very difficult decision of operating at perhaps 35% or 45% of regular revenues. They will not be able to access these programs and, in many cases, there is going to be a disincentive to reopen and put people back to work. Will the Prime Minister amend these programs to provide for more flexibility so that more and more Canadians can start to return to work in the weeks ahead? right hon. Chair, we are in an unprecedented crisis and we had to move quickly to support workers and to support families across the country, and that's exactly what we did. We're going to continue to work to try to respond to the reality that people and businesses are facing right across the country. I am eager to be faced with the challenge of how to ease off in these measures so that people can get back to work. We are still focused very much on giving the supports to workers and families that are so necessary in this time of crisis. As different provinces move forward towards reopening, as we look at different paths forward, I know that I will be able to count on all members in the House and, indeed, on Canadians from coast to coast to coast to figure out together what the best way will be to move forward on keeping us safe and restoring economic activity in the right way. the chair: We have about a minute left for maybe a 30-second question and a 30-second answer. The problems with them have been flagged for the government for weeks as well, but we're also going to see an additional challenge, where people who are receiving the emergency response benefit, who may have the option to go back to work and work some hours, are faced with a hard cap of $1,000 a month before they lose the CERB. Conservatives are proposing a progressive system, a more flexible system, where people will be able to earn more without losing their benefits as businesses ramp up but before normal working hours are restored. Again, will the Prime Minister build in some flexibility to lift the restrictive ceiling on what people can earn before losing benefits so that it always pays more to work? the chair: I believe the timer is telling all of us that the time is up, but I'll give the right honourable Prime Minister about 30 seconds to answer that, please. Our priority was getting support for Canadians right across the country with the CERB, with the wage subsidy and with other measures for students, for seniors, for farmers and for agricultural producers. We are going to work with communities and with industry as we look to reopen, to make sure that people have opportunities to work and are not penalized for it. However, our overarching priority was allowing Canadians to be confident in their ability to stay home, care for their loved ones, buy groceries and pay their rent so that we could keep safe during this pandemic. We've heard the Prime Minister admit that fixed incomes for some of them are down, rent is increasing and the price of groceries is increasing. Chair, after a lifetime of hard work, of course Canadians deserve peace of mind when it comes to their retirement security. Happily, their pensions and their benefits are still flowing, unlike for so many of those who have lost their jobs, but it's still tough. People received a GST credit, a supplementary payment that was $400 on average for single seniors and $600 for couples. I think you had reminded us as members that the amount of time for the answer should be similar to the amount of time for the question. the chair: I want to remind all honourable members to keep their answers as well as their questions as concise as possible. We see a number of inconsistencies in what is considered essential travel with regard to the U.S. While we have Americans coming over to buy cheaper prescription medications and to fish, individuals in my riding who are trying to get auditors over so that they can be approved for export businesses are being declined. We have people who have purchased masts from Canadian producers for their boats, and who want to come and pick them up, who are not being allowed to do that. When will they clarify the rules to the CBSA agents so that essential travel and trade and commerce, including individual commerce, is understood? hon. Chair, we have implemented very rigorous rules that have been well documented and understood by CBSA to stop all non-essential travel. At the same time, we recognize the importance of maintaining essential supply routes so that goods and services could reach Canada and we could put groceries on our shelves. The work we are doing to stop non-essential travel has been important for the health and safety of Canadians, and we will continue with that work. We see that many of them are not eligible for any of the benefit packages that have been rolled outEI, CERB, the wage subsidy, etc. What is the government going to do to address sole proprietors who are currently falling through the cracks? hon. Chair, first, let me say that we absolutely recognize there are businesses across the country of all sizes that are finding this to be extremely difficult. The intent of the measures we put forward is obviously not only to give individuals a bridge but to give businesses a bridge. We are looking at ways that we can ensure that the Canada emergency business account has the broadest possible application. We are looking at ways we can consider that eligibility process, recognizing that we need to make sure that the program continues to have its desired impact, and we will have more to say on that. Since then the minister has overruled the will of harvesters in Prince Edward Island and in the gulf who voted to start their seasons on time, but she has allowed harvesters from her own riding to proceed with their seasons as scheduled, giving them access to markets weeks before their competitors. This double standard is severely unfair and Atlantic harvesters are furious, as demonstrated during the protests on the Canso Causeway yesterday. When will the minister stop abusing her position and start respecting fish harvesters by opening up lobster fishing areas 23, 24 and 26? hon. Chair, when making decisions with regard to when seasons open, a number of factors are taken into account. They are complex decisions that take into account what is necessary for processors to be ready for the season, what is necessary for harvesters to be ready for the season, as well socio-economic impacts on the area. In the decisions we've made around the gulf, one of the main things we heard from all of those areas is that it was very important for them to start on the same date. Maybe I'll start muting if it's necessary, but interrupting is not going to solve anything. West coast fishing tourism is a key economic driver in British Columbia, especially in coastal communities, and yet the public fishery gets no respect from the government. A year later, the fisheries minister refuses even to discuss viable, science-based solutions to conserve B.C.'s public fisheries. Does the minister and her government have a will and a plan to support Canada's west coast fisheries and the communities they sustain? the chair: The hon. That's why we continue to work with those communities and with the fisheries to make sure that we're doing everything we possibly can to support them. During these extremely difficult times, we're working on measures with the fishery in B.C., as well as on the Atlantic coast and eastern Quebec, to make sure that we're delivering for them and that all of the issues they're having are being addressed. Chair, Canada's seniors, especially those on basic incomes, are being hard hit by the COVID-19 crisis as they face new rising costs and scarcity of services. Seniors require adequate caregiver supports, physical safety and freedom to access their savings to reinforce their financial security. Why has the government failed to recognize the increasing challenges that seniors are facing? Will the government support Canada's senior citizens? the chair: The hon. We have provided a GST credit supplement of $400 for single seniors and $600 for couples, for low- and modest-income seniors. We have also ensured that the Canada emergency response benefit is there for seniors who have lost income due to COVID-19. On April 23, my colleagues and I called on the government to create a program that would match students seeking employment with employers in Canada's essential food supply chains. What has the government done to match students and other Canadians seeking employment with employers in the agriculture and agri-food sectors, including those in the fish and seafood sector? hon. Chair, we're doing all we can to make sure, using our existing employment programs, that we create opportunities for students to work and get work experience this summer. We know that this is going to be really tough, especially in areas like agriculture, so we have dedicated streams for agriculture sector employers to access students with help from the government, and a number of different initiatives including Canada summer jobs, which I'm really excited to see the results of in the coming days. Arnold, it's the second time that I note you've threatened to cut off a Conservative microphone. I'm just wondering, given that this isn't the House of Commons and it's structured as a committee, what standing order would give you the right to cut off a member of Parliament using a mute button. It seems a little dictatorial, and I was just wondering whether you could clarify that, based on the Standing Orders. the chair: I don't think I threatened to use mute, but thank you for bringing that up. I am trying to keep the rules where the questions and the answers are equal, so that there are no interruptions on either side. Bring the papers with the actual verbiage on it where I threatened, and we'll go over it, but I don't think this is the venue to do that. rachael harder (lethbridge, cpc): Canadians have outrightly expressed outrage and disappointment with the government's initiative to put a gun ban in place. Does the minister stand by his comment that these changes would have prevented the tragedy in Nova Scotia? the chair: The honourable minister in 15 seconds or less, please. bill blair: We have heard from health professionals, women's rights organizations, victims groups and the police and our unions. They're all very supportive of the government's measure to ban weapons that have no place in a civil society and were designed to kill people. rachael harder: It's interesting that the minister is misleading Canadians in that comment because the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police has actually said that a gun ban will do nothing of the sort, that it actually will not protect Canadians. How many criminals will see guns seized because of the changes that have been implemented by the Liberal government? hon. The Ontario Association of Chiefs of Police said that they support a prohibition on all military-designed assault rifles. The chief in Toronto said that taking those assault rifles off the streets contributes to public safety, and the Canadian Association of Police Chiefs has declared that military assault rifles are produced for the sole purpose of killing people in large numbers and they urged successive governments to enact legislation to ban all military assault rifles. Absolutely no criminals will see their guns seized based on the Liberals' legislation that's coming forward because it actually goes after those who legally own and use their firearms. Can the Prime Minister please tell us why he decided to go after law-abiding citizens instead of actually going after criminals who have gotten their firearms in an illegal manner and then used them to commit crimes? the chair: The honourable minister in 25 seconds or less, please. bill blair: Yes, to be very clear, the order in council actually is targeted at weapons, weapons that were designed for military use, and in their design and in their intent, to kill people, they've actually been used in this country, at cole Polytechnique; in Moncton; at a Quebec City mosque; in Fredericton; at Mayerthorpe and most recently in Nova Scotia. They are being used and have been used in Canada and around the world to commit mass murder, and in the interest of public safety and at the urging the chair: We'll go on to Ms. Now I understand the Prime Minister has his food prepared for him at 24 Sussex Drive and then it's delivered to him at the cottage where he lives. Now, they're in a crisis right now, which means that regular Canadians are actually at risk of not having food available for them at the grocery stores where they purchase theirs. Why doesn't the Prime Minister care about the women and the men who work incredibly hard to keep Canada fed? hon. chrystia freeland (deputy prime minister and minister of intergovernmental affairs): Mr. member that our government cares very, very much about the women and men who work so hard to feed our country. Let me just say I am grateful to all the farmers, like my dad, who are out in their fields right now getting ready for seeding. We, as Canadians, are lucky to be citizens of an agricultural superpower, and our government believes in supporting our farmers and ranchers. rachael harder: I'm confused as to why the Prime Minister didn't take my question, and at a bare minimum as to why the agriculture minister doesn't feel it's important enough for her to be a part of this discussion today. When we have farmers who produce for Canadians on a daily basis and they're asking some serious and some very important questions, and we don't even have a minister who's willing to come to the table and engage in this conversation, that's shameful. Several meat-packing plants have been forced to shut down because of COVID-19 and, as a result, farmers are forced to hold stock longer than expected. Cattle producers in my region are spending more than $60,000 a day to keep their livestock fed while they wait for processing plants to reopen. When will the government take this seriously and at least implement a set-aside program for those who are beef producers in Canada? hon. Chair, let me just say that I feel there is nothing shameful at all in having me, the Deputy Prime Minister, answer questions about agriculture. I am actually very proud to speak up for Canada's amazing farmers, for our country's amazing ranchers, for our amazing pork producers and our poultry producers. james bezan (selkirkinterlakeeastman, cpc): Thank you, Mr. I too would like to express my sincere condolences to the families and friends of the six military heroes who lost their lives at sea last week. I'm sure that all members of the House stand shoulder to shoulder with the families, with the crew of the HMCS Fredericton and, indeed, with the entire Canadian Armed Forces community during this time of grief. Can the Minister of National Defence give us an update as to the Cyclone helicopter crash off the coast of Greece last week? hon. Our number one priority is to make sure that we look after them, and that's exactly what we are doing. I actually spoke with the Italian minister of defence and he promised full support for this investigation and any support that's required. the chair: I'm afraid I'm going to have to cut you off there, if we're going by the rules that were pointed out by the House. I know that back in early January, military intelligence through CF Intelligence Command was reporting, through the chain of command, the novel coronavirus and the outbreak in Wuhan. On what date was he, as Minister of National Defence, given his first intelligence briefing on the outbreak and the pandemic in China? hon. We work with our Five Eyes intelligence sources and this has been a whole-of-government effort, right from the beginning. Obviously, I can't discuss the intelligence in this forum, but I can assure you that our response has been well informed with the correct information. james bezan: Minister Sajjan, we know that intelligence was going up the chain of command in National Defence. It was reported in the media that in early January the hierarchy within the Canadian Armed Forces was being made aware of the coronavirus outbreak. As with all our intelligence, we work together from a whole-of-government perspective with all of our intelligence agencies. One thing I can assure you is that our response has been well informed with all the correct information that is provided to me and other members of cabinet. james bezan: What was that timeline? From the time you were first told, Minister Sajjan, about the coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan, what did you do with that intelligence? When did you give it to the Prime Minister or to Minister Hajdu as the Minister of Health? hon. Chair, let me say that our government's response to this global pandemic has of course been informed by the excellent work of Canadian intelligence agencies throughout. In January, the Prime Minister convened a meeting of the incident response group, and in January we increased screening at all major airports. All of these actions were informed by the work of our excellent intelligence community, and of course our work with our Five Eyes, NATO and NORAD allies. james bezan: I want to come back the chair: We now move to Mr.Ste-Marie. gabriel ste-marie (joliette, bq): Can I go ahead, Mr.Chair? the chair: Yes, go ahead. In an interview with Grald Fillion, tax expert Andr Lareau, who specializes in tax havens, pointed out that $350billion Canadian is parked in just 12tax havens. Mr.Lareau also notes that the government is aware that all of this Canadian money is stashed in tax havens but is doing nothing about it. He said that it's time for Canada to tackle the problem given that it has a $250-billion deficit, and that if it doesn't act now to change things, it never will. diane lebouthillier (minister of national revenue): Mr.Chair, as soon as we took office, in 2015, our government made cracking down on tax evaders in Canada and abroad a priority. I realize that my fellow member is impatient, but he has to understand that this is a very complex issue. Under our leadership, in three years, the Canada Revenue Agency has undertaken twice as many audits related to offshore tax evasion as it did in the 10years the Conservatives were in power. As we speak, the agency is conducting more than 50criminal investigations tied to international tax evasion. gabriel ste-marie: You're right, I am very impatient, because whenever I bring up the fact that companies are using tax havens legally, the minister misses the point and tells me that she is going after fraudsters. Since Parliament began sitting virtually, it's been mentioned a few times that Denmark and Poland have decided to deal with the issue. Even France's finance minister, Bruno LeMaire, said that companies with subsidiaries in tax havens would not be eligible for public assistance. We hear thePrime Minister and other government officials say all the time that the wage subsidies are going to workers, so I'd like to cite another examplebanks. The government is injecting huge amounts of cash into the financial system and repurchasing troubled assets in massive quantities, and yet, the five major banks in Toronto, alone, are continuing to save billions of dollars every year by artificially redirecting their profits to tax havens. This has nothing to do with wages for workers, and everything to do with the repurchase of troubled assets, cash flow and billions of dollars that the government could be going after. Is the government going to seize this opportunity to make the corporate use of tax havens illegal? hon. diane lebouthillier: Mr.Chair, our government is taking unprecedented steps through the Canada emergency wage subsidy measure to support businesses and workers affected by COVID-19. What's more, any employer receiving the subsidy who is deemed ineligible will have to repay the full amount. Anyone who abuses the program could face a fine of up to 225% of the wage subsidy amount and up to five years in prison. the chair: Mr.Ste-Marie, you have about 30seconds to ask your question, and about the same for the answer. Although completely immoral, the use of tax havens by companies is legal under section5907 of the Income Tax Regulations. We are going to have a $250-billion deficit to pay off, and everyone is going to have to chip in, including the rich who are currently taking advantage of the system. diane lebouthillier: Mr.Chair, thanks to a historic billion-dollar investment, our government has given the agency the resources it needs to do the job, and we are starting to see results. I'm proud of how the Government of Canada has been beside Canadians through every step of this pandemic and has supported Canadians when they needed it most. In BonavistaBurinTrinity and across our country, our commercial fishery has seen many challenges and impacts. Last week, my colleague, the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans, announced an investment that will ensure resilience of the food system by allowing Canada's fish and seafood processing sector to safely and efficiently process, store, package and distribute healthy, high-quality products on to the plates of Canadians. The fish harvesters in my riding are fearful of what will happen within this industry and their immediate futures. Chair, I want to thank my colleague from BonavistaBurinTrinity for keeping us well aware of what's happening in his riding with harvesters and with processors. It's the backbone and the lifeblood of our communities and that's why we want to be there to support them. We've already taken steps by making sure that the CERB is now able to be accessed by people who are seasonal workers. As well, we are making sure that people who are running out of fishers EI are also able to qualify for it. We also have made an investment of $62.5 million to support our processors to make sure they are able to be ready for the challenges that they are going to face because of COVID-19. We are working with our partners across industry to make sure we're hearing what their major concerns are. We will have more to say about that and what we will be able to do in the coming days. Chair, in my riding of SurreyNewton, I'm in close contact with businesses that represent all the chair: We have a point of order. damien kurek (battle rivercrowfoot, cpc): Sorry, but there seems to be an issue with the audio. Chair, in my riding of SurreyNewton, I'm in close contact with businesses that represent all vantage points in the supply chainfrom manufacturers to retailers, transport companies to warehousing. With provinces and territories moving at different speeds and implementing different protocols for reopening the economy, there is a lot of confusion in my local business community on the timing and logistics of how this will happen. With so many different parts of the supply chain operating in different jurisdictions, and with each business serving unique roles on this spectrum, how can the federal government serve to best coordinate with the provinces and territories so that the supply chain can be implemented smoothly as we embark on our economic recovery? hon. One of the most important things the federal government can do when it comes to the reopening of the Canadian economy is to work in close collaboration with the premiers of the provinces and territories. That's why I was so pleased that last week the Prime Minister, together with all the first ministers of the country, was able to issue a statement around the principles that will be guiding our entire country as we move towards a restart. This is so important because, as my colleague has pointed out, all of our business, our economic activity, happens across the country. We have been able to work together in fighting coronavirus, and we are going to work together in the future to keep on fighting coronavirus and to reopen Canada. In Alberta, meat-packing plants are directly responsible for nearly a quarter of all COVID-19 cases. The government and management ignored the pleas of workers and did not put effective safety protocols in place to deal with COVID-19. Now, two workers are dead, at least six more are in intensive care and COVID-19 is spreading like wildfire through these communities. On March 27, regarding the CERB, the Minister of Finance said that if workers don't feel comfortable in their work, if they decide to stay home, they can apply for the benefit, yet the website says differently. Will the minister guarantee that every Canadian receiving CERB, EI or the CESB will not lose their benefits if they refuse to return to work or to accept work that is unsafe due to COVID-19? hon. chrystia freeland: Let me thank the member, first of all, for her really very important question. I think all of us share the concern for Canada's essential workers who are keeping us safe, putting food on our tables and often working in difficult conditions. When it comes to the Cargill plant, this is an issue that our government has been very closely engaged in. My colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, has spoken with her provincial counterpart and the head of the plant. To the question my colleague asked about workers, it is absolutely the case that no Canadian should feel they need to work in an environment that is unsafe, and it is also very much the case that any Canadian who is feeling unwell should stay at home. This is the way that collectively we take care of ourselves and we take care the chair: We will go on to Ms. heather mcpherson: I just want to be clear, because I'm not a hundred per cent sure that I got an answer in that response, so I'll try one more time. Knowing that workers have a fundamental right to refuse unsafe work, can the minister confirm one hundred per cent that if workers refuse unsafe work, they will be able to access the CERB, or was the Minister of Finance incorrect when he spoke on March 27? the chair: The honourable minister. chrystia freeland: In a time of coronavirus that is even more the case, and the government of course should not penalize workers for doing the right thing and declining to go to work in unsafe conditions. the chair: I want to remind the honourable members to place their questions through the Chair to avoid back and forth, just to try to keep some order in the meeting. If the provincial government won't shut down the plant, will the federal government shut down unsafe plants through the Canadian Food Inspection Agency? hon. Chair, on the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, let me be very clear that my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, has been in touch with provincial authorities. The duties of the food inspection agency, of course, are to ensure that the food produced at the plant is safe. We are working closely with provincial authorities and with health authorities to ensure that the chair: We will go back to Ms. Can the finance minister please let us know if Cargill, a company that is owned by billionaires, with business in Luxembourg, a known tax haven, has received any federal funding this year for COVID-related support? hon. diane lebouthillier: This is a tough time for Canadians, and our government is doing everything it can to support them. More than 7million Canadians have applied for the Canada emergency response benefit, which the Canada Revenue Agency and Service Canada administer. I want to say how proud I am of the work the agency is doing; staff worked tirelessly to get the program up and running in record time. richard bragdon (tobiquemactaquac, cpc): Thank you, Mr. Potato farmers in New Brunswick and across Canada are sitting on massive stores of potatoes that were destined for the restaurant industry, but due to the pandemic, they now have no customers. What is the Prime Minister's plan for the helping farmers offload these potatoes so that they are ready for the 2020 season? hon. We are aware that the coronavirus, by keeping us away from restaurants where we eat french fries, has had a profound effect on the market for potatoes. The program announced today by the Prime Minister and my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, will be very helpful for potato farmers, including with the surplus food program that starts with a $50 million fund, and that the chair: We'll go back to Mr. With an estimated $300 million worth of potatoes in storage, the announced funding from the government today simply doesn't go far enough. How does the Prime Minister plan to mitigate these shortfalls and allow farmers to continue to grow the food we so desperately need? hon. The program today is $252 million, which comes on top of the broad range of other programs that farmers, of course, have access to. On potato farmers, in particular, I agree with the honourable member that this is a specific area of concern. I think all Canadians would like to see those potatoes not be wasted but be used, and that's why the $50 million for surplus food purchase is going to be so helpful. The $16-billion beef industry is expected to take a massive hit due to the closures and reduced production of the meat-packing plants. Does the government truly believe that the announced $125 million that is shared between beef, poultry and pork producers will be enough to support these multi-billion dollar industries so they can put food on the tables of Canadians? hon. Chair, I absolutely agree with the honourable member that our beef, pork and poultry producers are absolutely essential for our country. I am very pleased as a Canadian that we have security that comes from being a country that produces not only enough food for ourselves, but also enough food to feed the world. That is why the $125 million specifically to support our beef, pork and poultry producers is going to be so helpful. Chair, the government's announcement of $252 million for the agriculture sector falls well short of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture's request for immediate government relief for farmers. The president of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, Mary Robinson, put it today something like this: that if the farmhouse is on fire, the government has offered the equivalent of a bucket of water. Does the government have a plan to offer more than just crumbs to keep the vital agriculture sector operating and providing the food we so desperately need? When will the government finally make those who literally keep our land and grow our food a priority in this time of crisis? hon. Chair, I don't know about the honourable member, but where I come from, $252 million is not just crumbs. I would like to take this opportunity to highlight two other aspects of the essential support for farmers that we announced today: the $77 million to support food processors, which will not only be important for the processors, but helpful for the farmers who produce products that go to them; and the $250 million that we would like to add to the Canadian Dairy Commission's line of credit to raise it to half a billion dollars, which will be very helpful to our essential dairy farmers. Chair, a couple in my riding has had to shut down their business, and they are on CERB. They were shocked when their 16-year-old son also qualified, and he is receiving $8,000 on the basis of part-time work throughout the school year. Why is the government handing out a windfall to teenagers who are living at home while denying university students and ignoring seniors on fixed incomes? hon. Chair, any individual who has lost work for COVID reasons is eligible for the CERB, regardless of their personal circumstances. If you made $5,000 in the past year and are a resident of Canada, you qualify for the CERB. This is not a matter of differentiating between the personal circumstances of individuals but of acknowledging that many workers in different situations have lost their work or have had their work significantly reduced because of COVID. cathay wagantall: Clearly, high school students would not have the same needs as university students and our seniors who are suffering at this time. The government's own findings on banning handguns and assault firearms state, In all cases the data does not conclusively demonstrate that these handgun or assault weapon bans have led to reductions in gun violence. Why is the Prime Minister so bent on penalizing law-abiding firearms owners when he should be focusing on funding our CBSA officers first, giving them the resources they need to seize smuggled firearms at our borders? hon. Chair, I note with some interest that when we brought forward legislation in a budget in the last two years to increase the number of officers at the border, the member opposite voted against it. The evidence is overwhelming that these weapons are designed to be used, and have been used, to kill innocent people. Countries that adopt sensible gun policiesplaces like New Zealand, Australia, the United Kingdomhave all recognized that there's no place for these weapons in a civil society. There have been far too many people killed with these weapons, and even most recently, to honour and respect the terrible tragedy in Nova Scotia, the time to act is now, and we've acted. cathay wagantall: Last week the Minister of Agriculture said, Step by step we are giving our farmers...the tools they need to continue their...work. On April 30, the Canadian Federation of Agriculture called on the minister to create a $2.6-billion fund to maintain food security in Canada. This morning, the Prime Minister announced $252 million, hit-and-miss, across the agriculture sector. With all due respect, this is a slap in the face to our farmers and the agri-food sector. If the deputy minister is going to answer the question in her place, how does she see it is right to be providing $9 billion to students and only crumbs to our agriculture sector? hon. Chair, first of all, let me say I do not, as has now been suggested by two members opposite, consider it in any way shameful that I should be answering questions about our support for the agricultural sector. The $252 million of support is real and meaningful, and it is directed exactly where it is needed. As to the question about students, let me just point out that farm kids are students too, and farm kids will be benefiting from the support for students. Meat packing plants like Quebec-based Olymel are extremely worried that they won't be able to stay open throughout the pandemic. In the summer, these plants rely on students to do overtime and fill in for full-time employees on vacation. However, the Canada emergency student benefit makes it possible for these much-needed workers to stay home while still collecting the same amount of money. That's why the government must adjust its current summer job program for students in the agriculture and agri-food sectors. carla qualtrough: I can assure you that we are doing our best efforts to not disincentivize work. We are looking at ways we can create additional jobs through Canada summer jobs, through the the chair: There is a point of order. claude debellefeuille (salaberrysurot, bq): Mr.Chair, what the minister is saying is not being interpreted. carla qualtrough: Last week, as part of the measures announced around supporting our students, we announced the creation of 76,000 additional jobs, including jobs in the agriculture and processing sectors. This is exactly what we're doing through our youth employment and skills strategy, and that's what we'll continue to do. richard lehoux: I'm not sure the minister understood my question about the Canada emergency student benefit. I am very concerned about the agricultural sector, but the tourist and horticultural sectors are also on my mind. A number of business owners in my riding have reached out to me because the shortage of student workers is forcing them to shut down for the summer. Minister, what do you have to say to those business owners in the tourist and horticultural sectors whom you are not helping? hon. We've heard very clearly from the students that they want to work and want to serve in their communities in this time of crisis. That's why we're creating additional employment opportunities and an income support mechanism that allows them to work. Pork and beef producers are feeling the impact of the country's shutdown triggered by the pandemic. For the past five years, the government has been saying that the programs to help producers will be improved. When will the government make these changes, including the changes to agristability, and when can producers access them? hon. chrystia freeland: We announced over $77 million in assistance for food processors to help them protect their workers and deal with the costs associated with the coronavirus. To help livestock and pork producers, we established agrirecovery, a national initiative that will provide $125million to help producers adapt to market changes. The measures announced at noon today received a very cold reception from the entire agriculture and agri-food sector, since the sector had asked for about $2.6billion. I think that it's important to support our agri-food industry and our farms, given the significant need for sovereignty. Many Canadians in the agriculture and agri-food sector have made this clear, as I was saying earlier. chrystia freeland: Our country, Canada, will never depend on its neighbours or any other country for food. I want to mention another significant part of our announcement today, which is the $50million surplus food purchase program. alexandra mends (brossardsaint-lambert, lib.)): We'll now move on to the next question. blaine calkins (red deerlacombe, cpc): Madam Chair, how will the government's forced confiscation of law-abiding firearms owners' property prevent criminals from illegally acquiring firearms from the United States? hon. bill blair: Madam Chair, in response to that, I would simply remind the member that we have made it very clear that these weapons have no place in civil society, so we have prohibited military-style assault weapons that have been designed to be used to kill people and have been used to kill people. We'll bring forward new authorities, new offences, new penalties to deal with people who smuggle weapons across the border. We're also bringing in new regulations for the storage of weapons to make it more difficult for people to steal these guns. To deal with people who purchase them illegally and sell them illegally, there will be new offences and penalties to make ensure that they face the consequences. blaine calkins: The government previously has said that decisions like classifying firearms should be left to experts. A legal opinion that's already been obtained says that the bore of a 12-gauge shotgun with the choke removed is in excess of 20 millimetres. That is the same firearm that Olympic trap shooters, Olympic skeet shooters, duck hunters and geese hunters all across our country use on a very regular basis. First of all, we have prohibited large-bore weapons, such as grenade launchers, but with reference to the 10-gauge shotgun and the 12-gauge shotgun, I would simply remind the member that the bore of a 10-gauge shotgun is 19.69 millimetres in width and the bore of a 12-gauge shotgun is 18.53 millimetres in width, both of them under the size for prohibition and therefore not covered in the new prohibitions that the government introduced on Friday. blaine calkins: Madam Chair, the opinion is that of one of the foremost experts we have in Canada when it comes to firearms legislation. If the entirety of the barrel length is considered, then the removal of the choke makes that barrel in excess of 20 millimetres. There is no plan for a buyback program in this policy, and law-abiding firearms owners are not able currently to surrender their firearms. Given this, and the fact that law-abiding firearms owners aren't committing any gun violence, what was the government's immediate benefit of making this announcement on May 1? hon. Along with the prohibition that we have put in place, we have also, using the order in council, established an amnesty period, but the amnesty period is non-permissive grandfathering of those weapons. They cannot be used, they can't be taken to the range for shooting, they can't be used for hunting, they can't be sold and they can't be transferred, so we have put in strong measures to ensure that these weapons will not be available for use. We have also put in an amnesty period that will allow us to bring forward the legislation and a budget in order to effect a responsible, safe and effective buyback program to remove these weapons from society. blaine calkins: Madam Chair, since January 1, 2002, any law-abiding citizen who was issued with a firearms licence by the government would have been cross-referenced with a continuous eligibility check 6,695 times up until May 1 of this year. How many times was this most recent mass murderer here in Canada checked against a criminal database since January 2002? hon. bill blair: As the member is probably aware, there is a very extensive investigation currently being conducted into that individual and how he acquired his firearms, and it's not appropriate to discuss that. However, I think what is appropriate is to recognize that the weapons that this individual had available to him are weapons that were not designed for target shooting or hunting purposes or any sporting purposes. In the hands of someone who is intent on mass murder, they represent an unacceptable and deadly risk to Canadians, and that's why we have prohibited them. I'd also remind the member that other countries that have adopted sensible gun control laws, such as New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom, have also implemented very similar bans. I'd like to start by giving my condolences for the crew from the HMCS Fredericton who died, and in particular to the family of Captain Kevin Hagen. Other countries are strongly recommending that all citizens wear masks wherever people gather indoors, including in schools, on public transit and in stores. Taiwan has effectively stopped the spread of the coronavirus by supplying people with masks and installing dispensers of hand sanitizer throughout public spaces. Taiwan started in the top 10 countries affected by COVID-19, and today it is number 119. Will Canada follow Taiwan's example so we can lift the lockdown safely and get Canadians back to work? hon. patty hajdu (minister of health): Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and I thank the member for his question. There's no doubt that masks can play a role in a layered approach to protecting Canadians' health and safety, but as the member has mentioned, there are many other aspects to ensuring that Canadians are safe no matter where they go. Social distancing can provide the most protection, in fact, when you're out in public or you're in another place where there are other people. Tam has said that when physical distancing is not an option, Canadians should consider wearing a mask. I'd like to give a shout-out to Martha and her team, who are doing a fundraiser for the SPCA by making masks for citizens in my riding. Madam Chair, many people are falling through the cracks in the pandemic relief plan, including seniors who face an increase in the cost of living and a loss of retirement investment income. Will the government make the CERB a universal benefit to ensure that all Canadians who need help get help? If not, will the government increase old age security and allow seniors to withdraw funds from their RRSP without penalties so that they can pay their bills? hon. We do recognize that OAS and GIS are very important parts of the retirement income of Canadians, particularly lower-income seniors. The CERB is there for working seniors who have lost income as a result of COVID-19. We've also reduced the mandatory retirement withdrawals by 25%, and we've also spent half a billion dollars to support organizations that assist vulnerable Canadians, including seniors the acting chair (mrs. paul manly: Many small businesses do not meet the eligibility requirements for the various relief programs on offer, particularly sole proprietorships. At the same time, we have large companies in this country that use tax havens and loopholes to avoid paying their fair share of public services. Will the government ensure that the needs of small businesses are met and withhold relief from corporations that use tax havens to avoid paying taxes in Canada? hon. mary ng (minister of small business, export promotion and international trade): I want to thank the hon. That is why we have implemented many measures to help them weather this difficult period in COVID-19. Whether it is a small business loan, a wage subsidy or commercial rent assistance, or just lowering the cost by deferring GST or HST or customs duties, many measures have been put forward to help our small businesses through this very difficult time. As we navigate this pandemic crisis, we are also in the middle of another major crisis: the climate emergency. Will this government develop its economic recovery plan for the pandemic with the climate emergency at the forefront of its planning? the acting chair (mrs. The focus of the government at the present time is on combatting the virus and on steps to start to relax some of the measures that have been taken. As we look forward, we need to learn from the experiences of this crisis as well as look forward to some of the looming crises on the horizon. Climate change is one of those, and we certainly intend to reflect on resilience for the economy as we move forward. niki ashton (churchillkeewatinook aski, ndp): Thank you, Madam Chair. First nations across northern Manitoba and many others across the country have been doing everything possible to keep COVID-19 out of their communities. Many here have implemented strict lockdowns or travel restrictions, but the federal government has done virtually nothing to deal with the chronic issues that have made them vulnerable in the first place, such as overcrowded housing and the lack of hospitals. What is your government doing to support communities in the face of that possibility? Why isn't the government supporting the call for a ventilation centre in Berens River, a hospital in Cross Lake, a hospital in the Island Lake region? If the government couldn't act in time for this first wave of the pandemic, can it at least act in time for a potential second wave? hon. marc miller (minister of indigenous services): Indeed, Madam Chair, one of the reflections we have in coming out of this global pandemic is that we don't want to go into the next one with the same social determinants of health that have made indigenous communities more vulnerable and more susceptible to contracting and then spreading COVID-19. A lot of the historic housing funds that we have mobilized in order to address overcrowding in particular are cold comfort to those communities that are still finding themselves in overcrowded situations. In the staged approach to the epidemic and the onset of COVID-19, there are many measures that Indigenous Services Canada and as a whole of government we will deploy, including surge capacity, increased PPE, and nurses and doctors. Obviously, we are looking for a medical solution to a medical problem, and that is what we will spare no expense or resource to address as indigenous communities continue to face the looming threat of a second wave of COVID-19 as they start to relax some of their confinement procedures. niki ashton: Again, Madam Chair, to the Minister of Indigenous Services, many of us across northern Canada are deeply concerned by the outbreak taking place in northern Saskatchewan, centred in La Loche. Your government says it's committed to doing everything it can to keep first nations safe, yet nothing has been done to support calls for pandemic shutdowns. Will you support first nations in their call for shutdowns during this pandemic to save lives now? hon. Members won't be surprised to know that that number will only increase as the days go on and as we implement aggressive testing and contact tracing. We are working with surrounding first nations and communities and with the Mtis and Dene communities in La Loche to ensure that medical precautions are being put into place and that strict social distancing is being put into effect. This is a situation that is very much evolving minute by minute, and it is something for which we have deployed additional resources, along with Meadow Lake and the Northern Inter-Tribal Health Authority to ensure that there is a health response to a health problem. marc miller: One of the things we see as we see the evolving dynamic and the potential spreads, particularly the fear of clusters as communities, provinces, territories may choose to relax certain measures, is the need to have a more targeted approach as to how the economy reacts and deals with it, particularly in northern and vulnerable communities. This is something for which we will need to have a serious approach, with both the Minister of Natural Resources and also our provincial counterparts, to make sure that we aren't taking hasty measures to reopen the economy while we're trying to protectand this is our most important goalindigenous communities from getting exposed and spreading COVID-19. Hundreds of fishers and their families here in Manitoba who work with the Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation are desperately calling for emergency support. Many are calling on the federal government to also work with them and the FFMC to redirect their product to domestic markets and communities here at home to address the growing food insecurity people are facing. When will your government announce support for inland fishers, including here in Manitoba, and will you work to ensure that their product, healthy fish, can be provided here at home for people who need it? hon. bernadette jordan: Madam Chair, we know that COVID-19 is having extreme impacts on northern first nations communities, especially with regard to fisheries in areas that rely on it for not only their livelihoods but also for the cultural importance. Indigenous harvesters are able to access through the aboriginal financial institutions the $306 million we've put in for support for indigenous small and medium-sized businesses. The funding allows for short-term interest-free loans as well as for non-repayable contributions. We also announced earlier that the Canadian Northern Economic Development Agency has made available $15 million in non-repayable support for businesses. We know that there's more that needs to be done to support our first nations communities as well as our harvesters. I don't want to talk about the $1billion that the government used to track down tax cheats. I want to ask the minister why she isn't taking this opportunity to learn from countries that are putting an end to tax avoidance in tax havens, a legal but immoral practice in this day and age. Can she explain why she isn't showing leadership by convincing cabinet to change course and eliminate the legal measure known as tax avoidance, which enables companies to avoid paying taxes and put money in tax havens? hon. diane lebouthillier: MadamChair, as soon as our government took office in 2015, we made it a priority to crack down on tax cheats. Our government's historic investments of almost $1 billion have ensured that the agency can access the necessary resources for its work. claude debellefeuille: MadamChair, does the minister realize that she's being filmed and recorded and that she isn't answering my question? I don't want to talk about cheats. I want to talk about companies that use a legal mechanism to avoid paying taxes and to put their money in tax havens. Can she tell me how many companies legally take advantage of tax avoidance in tax havens? How much money escapes taxation through this legal mechanism? The government could invest this money in its economic recovery post-COVID-19. Regarding tax evasion abroad, our leadership made it possible for the agency to conduct twice as many audits in three years as it conducted in 10 years under the Conservatives. However, I don't understand the government's lack of willingness to eliminate this mechanism, which is legal but completely immoral. The Fdration de la relve agricole du Qubec and the UPA approached the Minister of Finance two weeks ago and still haven't received a response regarding the following issue. As a result, these farms are being penalized because they aren't eligible for the $40,000 in loans available through the Canada emergency business account. To qualify for these loans, the farms needed a payroll of $20,000 to $1.5million in 2019. Does the Minister of Finance plan to respond to the farmers who want to access the $40,000 in loans? hon. The tourism ministry was one of the first and hardest-hit industries during this crisis, yet despite the Prime Minister's announcement over three weeks ago now of a plan to bring forward a tourism-specific aid package to help the businesses who employ millions of unemployed Canadians who work in tourism, there's still been nothing from this government. I had the chance to talk to many of the leaders in the sector, and clearly there's a lot of anxiety. We also had the chance to work with all the G20 ministers of tourism all together, and we know we have to act the chair: We'll now go back to Mr. Tourism-based communities like the ones in Banff and Canmore, which I represent, are tourism-based economies and have unemployment rates of 85% or higher. They also don't qualify for a lot of the programs because they're seasonal businesses and make most or all of their revenues for the year from May to October, so they're at risk of losing their entire season. Will the government consider making changes to the programs to make sure that seasonal businesses can get help? What does the government plan to do to help the tourism industry recover after the pandemic? hon. Obviously, the tourism sector has access to many measures, including the CEBA account, the $40,000 account. They will be having access also to funding through the regional development agencies, and we'll be coming up with the details soon. Of course, in my colleague's riding of Banff, which is a fantastic place and a tourism gem, they will have access to the support through WD, western economic diversification. If there are particular cases you would like to raise with me, I would be more than happy to talk to you to see how, on the ground, we can help the tourism operators. It doesn't address anything about their concerns about the hard economic recovery they'll have after the pandemic. Another industry that's very hard hit in my province and my riding is the oil and gas industry. It's another industry the Prime Minister has promised to help, but there hasn't been anything. The only so-called assistance there's been to help hurting Albertans in the oil patch has been measures to speed up the death of the industry that they work in. Will the Liberal government ever show any concern for Albertans? Will they bring forward a plan to preserve Canadian jobs? Will they put forward a plan to ensure the use of Canadian oil before oil coming in from places like Saudi Arabia? hon. Chair, the federal government has taken several steps in recent weeks that will meaningfully support workers and communities that depend on this industry. We have the Canada emergency wage subsidy, which covers 75% of an employee's wages for the employer. We have more liquidity for oil and gas companies through new loans of $15 million to $60 million from the Business Development Bank of Canada. We continue to step forward in our response to the impacts of COVID-19 on my province here in Newfoundland and Labrador and on Alberta and Saskatchewan. These three provinces are being hit by two crises at the same time, a crisis of demand for oil and gas on the world markets and of course a crisis of public health with COVID-19. Chair, a lot of these things we're hearing about aren't going to actually help the industry to recover. Maybe what they could do is consider expediting the approval of billions of dollars of private sector projects that would put thousands and thousands of Canadians back to work. Will the government consider looking at ways that we can expedite projects? Will they look at ways that we can encourage the use of Canadian oil before the use of oil coming in from places like Saudi Arabia? hon. We have been working with labour, concentrating on workers and concentrating on the companies that support those jobs to make sure that they remain whole and those jobs will be there for those workers. We're particularly proud of our orphan wells program, which was launched by the Alberta government in conjunction with us. I am pleased to inform this House that the uptake on applications for that program is significantly higher than even we expected
Actually , I think he he redirected it to everybody also so  the PDA mikes  have a big bunch of energy at at  five hertz  where this came up was that  I was showing off these wave forms that we have on the web and and  I just sort of hadn't noticed this , but that the major , major component in the wave in the second wave form in that pair of wave forms is actually the air conditioner . I I have to be more careful about using that as a as a as a good illustration , in fact it 's not , of  of the effects of room reverberation . And then we had this other discussion about  whether this affects the dynamic range , cuz I know , although we start off with thirty two bits , you end up with  sixteen bits and you know , are we getting hurt there ? But  Dan is pretty confident that we 're not , that that quantization error is not is still not a significant factor there . So there was a question of whether we should change things here , whether we should change a capacitor on the input box for that or whether we should phd b: Yeah , he suggested a smaller capacitor , right ? professor a: Right . But then I had some other  thing discussions with him phd b: For the P D professor a: and the feeling was once we start monk monkeying with that , many other problems could ha happen . professor a: A simple thing to do is he he he has a I forget if it this was in that mail or in the following mail , but he has a a simple filter , a digital filter that he suggested . professor a:  The other thing that I don't know the answer to , but when people are using Feacalc here ,  whether they 're using it with the high - pass filter option or not . So when we 're doing all these things using our software there is  if it 's if it 's based on the RASTA - PLP program , which does both PLP and RASTA - PLP  then  there is an option there which then comes up through to Feacalc which  allows you to do high - pass filtering and in general we like to do that , because of things like this and it 's it 's pretty it 's not a very severe filter . Doesn't affect speech frequencies , even pretty low speech frequencies , at all , but it 's phd b: What 's the cut - off frequency it used ? professor a: Oh . I don't know I wrote this a while ago phd b: Is it like twenty ? professor a: Something like that .  I think there 's some effect above twenty but it 's it 's it 's it 's mild . So ,  it probably there 's probably some effect up to a hundred hertz or something but it 's it 's pretty mild . I don't know in the in the STRUT implementation of the stuff is there a high - pass filter or a pre pre - emphasis or something in the phd f:  . We we we want to go and check that in i for anything that we 're going to use the P D A mike for .  He says that there 's a pretty good roll off in the PZM mikes so we don't need need to worry about them one way or the other but if we do make use of the cheap mikes ,  we want to be sure to do that that filtering before we process it . And then again if it 's  depending on the option that the our our software is being run with , it 's it 's quite possible that 's already being taken care of .  the thing is it was since I was talking about reverberation and showing this thing that was noise , it wasn't a good match , but it certainly was still  an indication of the fact that you get noise with distant mikes .  It 's just not a great example because not only isn't it reverberation but it 's a noise that we definitely know what to do . professor a: So , it doesn't take deep a new bold new methods to get rid of  five hertz noise , so . So it was it was a bad example in that way , but it 's it still is it 's the real thing that we did get out of the microphone at distance , so it wasn't it w it w wasn't wrong it was inappropriate . So  , but  , Yeah , someone noticed it later pointed it out to me , and I went " oh , man .  So I think we 'll change our our picture on the web , when we 're @ @ . One of the things I was  , I was trying to think about what what 's the best way to show the difference an and I had a couple of thoughts one was , that spectrogram that we show is O K , but the thing is the eyes  and the the brain behind them are so good at picking out patterns from from noise that in first glance you look at them it doesn't seem like it 's that bad  because there 's many features that are still preserved . So one thing to do might be to just take a piece of the spec  of the spectrogram where you can see that something looks different , an and blow it up , and have that be the part that 's just to show as well .  Another , I was thinking of was  taking some spectral slices , like  like we look at with the recognizer , and look at the spectrum or cepstrum that you get out of there , and the the  , the reverberation  does make it does change that . grad c: W w what d what do you mean ? professor a: Well ,   all the recognizers look at frames . professor a: So it 's , yeah , at one point in time or  twenty over twenty milliseconds or something , you have a spectrum or a cepstrum . And if you look at phd b: You could just you could just throw up , you know ,  the  some MFCC feature vectors . You know , one from one , one from the other , and then , you know , you can look and see how different the numbers are . Well , that 's why I saying either Well , either spectrum or cepstrum phd b: I 'm just kidding . professor a: but but I think the thing is you wanna  phd b: I don't mean a graph . Yeah , at first I had a remark why I am wondering why the PDA is always so far . Since the last meeting we 've we 've tried to put together  the clean low - pass  downsampling , upsampling ,  the new filter that 's replacing the LDA filters , and also the  delay issue so that We considered th the the delay issue on the for the on - line normalization . professor a: But it 's not wer worse and it 's better better latency , phd f: It 's not professor a: right ? phd f: Yeah . It seems better when we look at the mismatched case but I think we are like like cheated here by the th this problem that  in some cases when you modify slight slightly modify the initial condition you end up completely somewhere air somewhere else in the in the space , the parameters . For Italian is at seventy - eight percent recognition rate on the mismatch , and this new system has eighty - nine . I don't I don't think it means that the new system is more robust professor a:  - huh . professor a: Well , the test would be if you then tried it on one of the other test sets , if if it was phd f: Y professor a: Right . professor a: So then if you take your changes phd f: It 's similar for other test sets professor a: and then phd f: but  from this se seventy - eight  percent recognition rate system , I could change the transition probabilities for the the first  and it will end up to eighty - nine also . phd f: By using point five instead of point six , point four as in the the HTK script . phd b:  th the only difference is you change the self - loop transition probability by a tenth of a percent phd f: Yeah . From point phd f: Even tenth of a percent ? phd b: I I 'm sorry phd f: Well , we tried we tried point one , phd b: f for point from You change at point one phd f: yeah . professor a: Oh ! phd b: and n not tenth of a percent , one tenth , phd f:  . phd b: alright ?  so from point five so from point six to point five and you get ten percent better . phd b: And it 's I think it 's what you basically hypothesized in the last meeting about  it just being very phd f:   phd b: and I think you mentioned this in your email too it 's just very  phd f: Mmm , yeah . phd b: you know get stuck in some local minimum and this thing throws you out of it I guess . professor a: Well , what 's what are according to the rules what what are we supposed to do about the transition probabilities ? Are they supposed to be point five or point six ? phd b: I think you 're not allowed to Yeah . But changing it to point five I think is which gives you much better results , but that 's not allowed . phd f: Yeah , but even if you use point five , I 'm not sure it will always give you the better results phd b: Yeah . We only tested it on the the medium mismatch , phd f: on the other training set ,  . phd b: right ? You said on the other cases you didn't notice phd f: Yeah . I think the reason is , yeah , I not I it was in my mail I think also , is the fact that the mismatch is trained only on the far microphone . Well , in for the mismatched case everything is  using the far microphone training and testing , whereas for the highly mismatched , training is done on the close microphone so it 's it 's clean speech basically so you don't have this problem of local minima probably and for the well - match , it 's a mix of close microphone and distant microphone and Well . phd b: I did notice  something phd f: So th I think the mismatch is the more difficult for the training part . phd b: Somebody , I think it was Morgan , suggested at the last meeting that I actually count to see how many parameters and how many frames . phd b: And there are  almost one point eight million frames of training data and less than forty thousand parameters in the baseline system . phd b: I did one quick experiment just to make sure I had everything worked out and I just  f for most of the  For for all of the digit models , they end up at three mixtures per state . And so I just did a quick experiment , where I changed it so it went to four and  it it it didn't have a r any significant effect at the  medium mismatch and high mismatch cases and it had it was just barely significant for the well - matched better . And I think also just seeing what we saw  in terms of the expected duration of the silence model ? when we did this tweaking of the self - loop ? The silence model expected duration was really different . phd b: And so in the case where  it had a better score , the silence model expected duration was much longer . I think you know if we make a better silence model I think that will help a lot too  for a lot of these cases so but one one thing I I wanted to check out before I increased the  number of mixtures per state was  in their default training script they do an initial set of three re - estimations and then they built the silence model and then they do seven iterations then the add mixtures and they do another seven then they add mixtures then they do a final set of seven and they quit . Seven seems like a lot to me and it also makes the experiments go take a really long time  to do one turn - around of the well matched case takes like a day . phd b: And so you know in trying to run these experiments I notice , you know , it 's difficult to find machines , you know , compute the run on . And so one of the things I did was I compiled HTK for the Linux machines professor a:   phd b: cuz we have this one from IBM that 's got like five processors in it ? professor a: Right . phd b: and so now I 'm you can run stuff on that and that really helps a lot because now we 've got you know , extra machines that we can use for compute . And if I 'm do running an experiment right now where I 'm changing the number of iterations ? from seven to three ? phd d:   And so if we can get away with just doing three , we can do many more experiments more quickly . And if it 's not a a huge difference from running with seven iterations , you know , we should be able to get a lot more experiments done . But if we can you know , run all of these back - ends f with many fewer iterations and on Linux boxes we should be able to get a lot more experimenting done . So I wanted to experiment with cutting down the number of iterations before I increased the number of Gaussians . professor a: But they 're not making things worse and we have reduced latency , right ? phd f: Yeah . But actually  actually it seems to do a little bit worse for the well - matched case and we just noticed that Yeah , actually the way the final score is computed is quite funny . It 's not a weighted mean of word error rate , it 's a weighted mean of improvements . Which means that actually the weight on the well - matched is Well I well what what What happened is that if you have a small improvement or a small if on the well - matched case it will have  huge influence on the improvement compared to the reference because the reference system is is is quite good for for the well - ma well - matched case also . phd b: So it it weights the improvement on the well - matched case really heavily compared to the improvement on the other cases ? phd f: No , but it 's the weighting of the of the improvement not of the error rate . Yeah , and it 's hard to improve on the on the best case , cuz it 's already so good , right ? phd f: Yeah but what  is that you can have a huge improvement on the H HMK 's ,  like five percent  absolute , and this will not affect the final score almost  this will almost not affect the final score because this improvement because the improvement  relative to the the baseline is small professor a: So they do improvement in terms of  accuracy ? rather than word error rate ? phd f:  .  improvement ? professor a: So phd f: No , it 's compared to the word er it 's improvement on the word error rate , professor a: OK . professor a: So if you have  ten percent error and you get five percent absolute  improvement then that 's fifty percent . So what you 're saying then is that if it 's something that has a small word error rate , then  a even a relatively small improvement on it , in absolute terms , will show up as quite quite large in this . Sure , but when we think about the weighting , which is point five , point three , point two , it 's on absolute on on relative figures , professor a: Yeah . That 's why I 've been saying we should be looking at word error rate  and and not not at at accuracies . phd b: it 's not it 's not that different , right ?  , just subtract the accuracy . professor a: Yeah but you 're but when you look at the numbers , your sense of the relative size of things is quite different . professor a: If you had ninety percent  correct and five percent , five over ninety doesn't look like it 's a big difference , but five over ten is is big . professor a: So just when we were looking at a lot of numbers and getting sense of what was important . professor a: What 's a little bit ? Like phd f: Like , it 's difficult to say because again  I 'm not sure I have the  phd b: Hey Morgan ? Do you remember that Signif program that we used to use for testing signi ? Is that still valid ? I I 've been using that . I just use my old one from ninety - two or whatever professor a: Yeah , I 'm sure it 's not that different but but he he  he was a little more rigorous , as I recall . s phd f:  well we start from ninety - four point sixty - four , and we go to ninety - four point O four . For Finnish , we start to ninety - three point eight - four and we go to ninety - three point seventy - four . And for Spanish we are we were at ninety - five point O five and we go to ninety - three - s point sixty one . professor a: And is that wh what do you know what piece you 've done several changes here . Because nnn , well  we don't have complete result , but the filter So the filter with the shorter delay hurts on Italian well - matched , which And , yeah . And the other things , like  downsampling , upsampling , don't seem to hurt and the new on - line normalization , neither . If we saw that making a small change like , you know , a tenth , to the self - loop had a huge effect , can we really make any conclusions about differences in this stuff ? phd f:   phd f: I think we can be completely fooled by this thing , but I don't know . There is first this thing , and then the yeah , I computed the  like , the confidence level on the different test sets . professor a: But OK , so you these these degradations you were talking about were on the well - matched case phd f: So . Do the does the new filter make things  better or worse for the other cases ? phd f: Yeah . OK , so  I guess the argument one might make is that , " Yeah , if you looked at one of these cases and you jiggle something and it changes then  you 're not quite sure what to make of it . But when you look across a bunch of these and there 's some some pattern , so eh h here 's all the if if in all these different cases it never gets better , and there 's significant number of cases where it gets worse , then you 're probably hurting things , I would say . So   at the very least that would be a reasonably prediction of what would happen with with a different test set , that you 're not jiggling things with . What I was asking , though , is  are what 's what 's the level of communication with  the O G I gang now , about this and phd f: Well , we are exchanging mail as soon as we we have significant results . We are working on our side on other things like  also trying a sup spectral subtraction but of of our own , another spectral substraction . It 's going professor a: Is there any further discussion about this this idea of of having some sort of source code control ? phd f: Yeah . As soon as we have something that 's significant and that 's better than than what was submitted , we will fix fix the system and But we 've not discussed it it it this yet , yeah . Sounds like a great idea but but I think that that  he 's saying people are sort of scrambling for a Eurospeech deadline . Anybo - anybody in the in this group do doing anything for Eurospeech ? phd f: S professor a: Or , is that what is that phd f: Yeah we are We are trying to to do something with the Meeting Recorder digits , professor a: Right . phd f: and , well , some people from OGI are working on a paper for this , but there is also the  special session about th Aurora which is  which has an extended deadline . professor a: So the deadline When 's the deadline ? When 's the deadline ? phd f:  ? I think it 's the thirteenth of May . So , I I think that you could certainly start looking at at the issue  but but  I think it 's probably , on s from what Stephane is saying , it 's it 's unlikely to get sort of active participation from the two sides until after they 've phd b: Well I could at least Well , I 'm going to be out next week but I could try to look into like this  CVS over the web . That seems to be a very popular way of people distributing changes and over , you know , multiple sites and things professor a:   phd b: so maybe if I can figure out how do that easily and then pass the information on to everybody so that it 's you know , as easy to do as possible and and people don't it won't interfere with their regular work , then maybe that would be good . And if you 're interested in using CVS , I 've set it up here , phd b: Oh great . grad c:  j phd b: I used it a long time ago but it 's been a while so maybe I can ask you some questions . Maybe you and I can talk a little bit at some point about coming up with a better  demonstration of the effects of reverberation for our web page , cuz  the    , actually the the  It made a good good audio demonstration because when we could play that clip the the the really obvious difference is that you can hear two voices and in the second one and only hear phd b: Maybe we could just like , talk into a cup . professor a: No , it sound it sounds pretty reverberant , but  you can't when you play it back in a room with a you know a big room , nobody can hear that difference really . professor a: They hear that it 's lower amplitude and they hear there 's a second voice , grad c:  - huh . professor a:  but  that actually that makes for a perfectly good demo because that 's a real obvious thing , that you hear two voices . But for the the visual , just , you know , I 'd like to have   , you know , the spectrogram again , grad c: Yeah . professor a: because you 're you 're you 're visual  abilities as a human being are so good you can pick out you know , you you look at the good one , you look at the cru the screwed up one , and and you can see the features in it without trying to @ @ phd b: I noticed that in the pictures . phd b: I thought " hey , you know th " I My initial thought was " this is not too bad ! " professor a: Right . But you have to you know , if you look at it closely , you see " well , here 's a place where this one has a big formant   formant maj major formants here are are moving quite a bit . professor a: So  you could that 's why I was thinking , in a section like that , you could take a look look at just that part of the spectrogram and you could say " Oh yeah . The main thing that struck me in looking at those two spectrograms was the difference in the high frequencies . It looked like for the one that was farther away , you know , it really everything was attenuated professor a: Right . Since you 're getting all this indirect energy , then a lot of it does have have  reduced high frequencies . But  the other thing is the temporal courses of things really are changed , and and  we want to show that , in some obvious way . " but I I just  After after  they were put in there I didn't really look at them anymore , cuz I just they were different . So maybe we can just substitute one of these wave forms and  then do some kind of zoom in on the spectrogram on an interesting area . professor a: The other thing that we had in there that I didn't like was that  the most obvious characteristic of the difference  when you listen to it is that there 's a second voice , and the the the the the  cuts that we have there actually don't correspond to the full wave form . It 's just the first I think there was something where he was having some trouble getting so much in , or . But it it 's  it 's the first six seconds or something of it and it 's in the seventh or eighth second or something where @ @ the second voice comes in . So we we would like to actually see the voice coming in , too , I think , since that 's the most obvious thing when you listen to it . phd f: So the thing that we did is just to add spectral subtraction before this , the Wall  process , which contains LDA on - line normalization . phd f: And so we started to look at at  things like this , which is , well , it 's Yeah . And the sentence contain only one word , which is " Due " And it can't clearly be seen . phd f: Where is the word ? phd b: This is this is , grad e:  . phd f: This is a plot of C - zero ,  when we don't use spectral substraction , and when there is no on - line normalization . phd f:  then when we apply mean normalization it looks like the second figure , though it is not . phd f: and And then the third figure is what happens when we apply mean normalization and variance normalization . What we can clearly see is that on the speech portion the two channel come becomes very close , but also what happens on the noisy portion is that the variance of the noise is professor a:   phd b: Can I ask  what does variance normalization do ? w What is the effect of that ? professor a: Normalizes the variance . phd f: So it phd b: No , I understand that , phd f: You you get an estimate of the standard deviation . phd f:  phd b: No , I understand what it is , but  , what does it what 's what is phd f: Yeah but . professor a: Well , because everything  If you have a system based on Gaussians , everything is based on means and variances . professor a: So if there 's an overall reason You know , it 's like  if you were doing  image processing and in some of the pictures you were looking at ,  there was a lot of light  and and in some , there was low light , phd b:   professor a: And the variance is just sort of like the next moment , you know ? So  what if  one set of pictures was taken  so that throughout the course it was went through daylight and night    ten times , another time it went thr  i is , you know , how how much how much vari phd b: Oh , OK . I guess a better example would be how much of the light was coming in from outside rather than artificial light . So if it was a lot if more was coming from outside , then there 'd be the bigger effect of the of the of the change in the So every mean every all all of the the parameters that you have , especially the variances , are going to be affected by the overall variance . professor a: And so , in principle , you if you remove that source , then , you know , you can phd b: I see . So would the major effect is that you 're gonna get is by normalizing the means , professor a: That 's the first order but thing , phd b: but it may help First - order effects . professor a: but then the second order is is the variances phd b: And it may help to do the variance . professor a: because , again , if you if you 're trying to distinguish between E and B phd b: OK . professor a: if it just so happens that the E 's were a more you know , were recorded when when the energy was was was larger or something , phd b:    professor a: or the variation in it was larger ,  than with the B 's , then this will be give you some some bias . phd b:  professor a: So the it 's removing these sources of variability in the data that have nothing to do with the linguistic component . And it and this professor a: i is if If you have a good voice activity detector , isn't isn't it gonna pull that out ? phd f: Yeah . Well what it it shows is that , yeah , perhaps a good voice activity detector is is good before on - line normalization and that 's what  we 've already observed . phd b: I don't know , it seems like this would be a lot easier than this signal to work with . What I notice is that , while I prefer to look at the second figure than at the third one , well , because you clearly see where speech is . phd f: But the problem is that on the speech portion , channel zero and channel one are more different than when you use variance normalization where channel zero and channel one become closer . phd b: But for the purposes of finding the speech phd f: And Yeah , but here phd b: You 're more interested in the difference between the speech and the nonspeech , phd f: Yeah . For I th I think that it perhaps it shows that  the parameters that the voice activity detector should use  have to use should be different than the parameter that have to be used for speech recognition . phd f: Well , y professor a: So you can do that by doing the voi voice activity detection . You also could do it by spect  spectral subtraction before the variance normalization , right ? phd f: Yeah , but it 's not clear , yeah . phd f: the the number that at that are here are recognition experiments on Italian HM and  with these two kinds of parameters . phd b: Where 's th phd f: But the fact is that the voice activity detector doesn't work on channel one . phd b: Where at what stage is the voice activity detector applied ? Is it applied here or a after the variance normalization ? phd f:  ? professor a: Spectral subtraction , I guess . Is it applied all the way back here ? phd f: It 's applied the  on , yeah , something like this , phd b: Maybe that 's why it doesn't work for channel one . professor a: Can I phd f: So we could perhaps do just mean normalization before VAD . Can I ask a ,  a sort of top - level question , which is  " if if most of what the OGI folk are working with is trying to integrate this other other  spectral subtraction , why are we worrying about it ? " phd f:   phd f: It 's just  Well it 's another They are trying to u to use the  the Ericsson and we 're trying to use something something else . When we do spectral subtraction , actually , I think that this is the the two last figures . phd b: Speech is more what ? phd f: Well , the difference between the energy of the speech and the energy of the n spectral subtrac subtracted noise portion is is larger . phd f: Well , if you compare the first figure to this one Actually the scale is not the same , but if you look at the the numbers  you clearly see that the difference between the C - zero of the speech and C - zero of the noise portion is larger .  but what happens is that after spectral subtraction , you also increase the variance of this of C - zero . And what they did at OGI is just  they don't use on - line normalization , for the moment , on spectral subtraction and I think Yeah . So yeah , we 're working on the same thing but I think  with different different system and professor a: Right .  , i the Intellectually it 's interesting to work on things th  one way or the other phd f:   professor a: but I 'm I 'm just wondering if  on the list of things that there are to do , if there are things that we won't do because we 've got two groups doing the same thing . phd b: if  you know , if if if you work on something else and and you 're waiting for them to give you spectral subtraction  it 's hard to know whether the effects that you get from the other experiments you do will carry over once you then bring in their spectral subtraction module . I don't know if that 's true or not , but I could see how phd f: Mmm .  , we still evidently have a latency reduction plan which which isn't quite what you 'd like it to be . And then  weren't issues of of having a a second stream or something ? That was Was it There was this business that , you know , we we could use up the full forty - eight hundred bits , and phd f: Yeah . And they are t I think they want to work on the second stream also , but more with some kind of multi - band or , well , what they call TRAP or generalized TRAP . Do you remember when the next meeting is supposed to be ? the next  phd f: It 's  in June . Yeah , the other thing is that you saw that that mail about  the VAD V A Ds performing quite differently ? That that  So  . This there was this experiment of  " what if we just take the baseline ? " phd f: Mmm . professor a: set  of features , just mel cepstra , and you inc incorporate the different V A And it looks like the the French VAD is actually  better significantly better . If the use the small VAD I th I think it 's on I think it 's easy to do better because it doesn't work at all . He Actually , I think that he say with the good VAD of from OGI and with the Alcatel VAD . phd f: Yeah but I it 's  I think you were talking about the other mail that used VAD on the reference features . professor a:  it was enough better that that it would  account for a fair amount of the difference between our performance , actually . phd f: And perhaps we can easily improve if if we put like mean normalization before the before the VAD . professor a: H Hynek will be back in town  the week after next , back back in the country . phd d: Also is Stephane was thinking that maybe it was useful to f to think about  voiced - unvoiced phd f:   phd f: Yeah , my feeling is that  actually when we look at all the proposals , ev everybody is still using some kind of spectral envelope professor a: Right . phd f: Yeah , well , not pitch , but to look at the  fine at the at the high re high resolution spectrum . We don't necessarily want to find the the pitch of the of the sound but  Cuz I have a feeling that when we look when we look at the just at the envelope there is no way you can tell if it 's voiced and unvoiced , if there is some It 's it 's easy in clean speech because voiced sound are more low frequency and . phd f:  there is the first formant , which is the larger and then voiced sound are more high frequencies cuz it 's frication and professor a: Right . When you have noise there is no  if if you have a low frequency noise it could be taken for for voiced speech and . professor a: but but phd b: Isn't there some other phd f: S phd b:  d phd f: So I think that it it would be good Yeah , yeah , well , go go on . phd b: I was just gonna say isn't there aren't aren't there lots of ideas for doing voice activity , or speech - nonspeech rather ,  by looking at  , you know ,  I guess harmonics or looking across time professor a: Well , I think he was talking about the voiced - unvoiced , though , phd f: Mmm . phd b:  w ah you know ,  even with the voiced - non voiced - unvoiced phd f: Mmm . phd f:  yeah , so yeah , I think if we try to develop a second stream well , there would be one stream that is the envelope and the second , it could be interesting to have that 's something that 's more related to the fine structure of the spectrum . We were thinking about like using ideas from from Larry Saul , have a good voice detector , have a good , well , voiced - speech detector , that 's working on on the FFT and  professor a: U phd f: Larry Saul could be an idea . We were are thinking about just kind of  taking the spectrum and computing the variance of of the high resolution spectrum and things like this .  we had a guy here some years ago who did some work on  making use of voicing information  to help in reducing the noise . phd f: Yeah ? professor a: So what he was doing is basically y you you do estimate the pitch . professor a: And  you from that you you estimate or you estimate fine harmonic structure , whichev ei either way , it 's more or less the same . But  the thing is that  you then can get rid of things that are not i if there is strong harmonic structure , you can throw away stuff that 's that 's non - harmonic . professor a: And that that is another way of getting rid of part of the noise phd f: Yeah . It was kind of like RASTA was taking care of convolutional stuff phd f: Mmm . We 've actually back when Chuck was here we did some voiced - unvoiced  classification using a bunch of these , phd f: But professor a: and and  works OK . professor a: But the thing is that you can't given the constraints of this task , we can't , in a very nice way , feed forward to the recognizer the information the probabilistic information that you might get about whether it 's voiced or unvoiced , where w we can't you know affect the the  distributions or anything . phd b: Didn't the head dude send around that message ? Yeah , I think you sent us all a copy of the message , where he was saying that I I 'm not sure , exactly , what the gist of what he was saying , but something having to do with the voice activity detector and that it will that people shouldn't put their own in or something . professor a: I guess what you could do , maybe this would be w useful , if if you have if you view the second stream , yeah , before you before you do KLT 's and so forth , if you do view it as probabilities , and if it 's an independent So , if it 's if it 's  not so much envelope - based by fine - structure - based ,  looking at harmonicity or something like that ,  if you get a probability from that information and then multiply it by you know , multiply by all the voiced outputs and all the unvoiced outputs , you know , then use that as the phd f:   professor a:  take the log of that or  pre pre  pre - nonlinearity , phd f: Yeah . i if professor a:  and do the KLT on the on on that , phd f: Yeah . And then that would be phd f: Yeah , well , I was not thinking this yeah , this could be an yeah So you mean have some kind of probability for the v the voicing professor a: R Right . If you have a tandem system and then you have some kind of it can be pretty small net phd f:   professor a: and the and and you use the thing is to use information primarily that 's different as you say , it 's more fine - structure - based than than envelope - based phd f:   professor a:  so then it you you you can pretty much guarantee it 's stuff that you 're not looking at very well with the other one , and  then you only use for this one distinction . professor a: And and so now you 've got a probability of the cases , and you 've got  the probability of the finer  categories on the other side . professor a: if they really are from independent information sources then they should have different kinds of errors phd f:   professor a: and roughly independent errors , and it 's a good choice for phd f:   Because , yeah , well , spectral subtraction is good and we could u we could use the fine structure to to have a better estimate of the noise but still there is this issue with spectral subtraction that it seems to increase the variance of of of professor a: Yeah . phd f:  Well it 's this musical noise which is annoying if you d you do some kind of on - line normalization after . Spectral subtraction and on - line normalization don't seem to to go together very well . I professor a: Or if you do a spectral subtraction do some spectral subtraction first and then do some on - line normalization then do some more spectral subtraction  , maybe maybe you can do it layers or something so it doesn't doesn't hurt too much or something . professor a: But it but  , anyway I think I was sort of arguing against myself there by giving that example phd f: Yeah . professor a:   cuz I was already sort of suggesting that we should be careful about not spending too much time on exactly what they 're doing In fact if you get if you go into  a  harmonics - related thing it 's definitely going to be different than what they 're doing and   phd f:   I know that when have people have done  sort of the obvious thing of taking  your feature vector and adding in some variables which are pitch related or  that it hasn't my impression it hasn't particularly helped . professor a: But I think  that 's that 's a question for this  you know extending the feature vector versus having different streams . Was it nois noisy condition ? the example that you you just professor a: And and it may not have been noisy conditions . I I don't remember the example but it was it was on some DARPA data and some years ago and so it probably wasn't , actually phd f:   But we were thinking , we discussed with Barry about this , and perhaps thinking we were thinking about some kind of sheet cheating experiment where we would use TIMIT professor a:  - huh . phd f: and see if giving the d  , this voicing bit would help in in terms of  frame classification . professor a: Why don't you why don't you just do it with Aurora ? phd f: Mmm . professor a: Just any i in in each in each frame phd f: Yeah , but but B but we cannot do the cheating , this cheating thing . Cuz we don't have Well , for Italian perhaps we have , but we don't have this labeling for Aurora . professor a: But you could  you can you can align so that It 's not perfect , but if you if you know what was said and phd b: But the problem is that their models are all word level models . phd b: You So you could find out where the word boundaries are but that 's about it . grad e: S But we could use  the the noisy version that TIMIT , which you know , is similar to the the noises found in the TI - digits  portion of Aurora . phd f: Well , I guess I guess we can we can say that it will help , but I don't know . If this voicing bit doesn't help , I think we don't have to to work more about this because professor a:  . professor a: and different ta it was probably Resource Management or something , I think you were getting something like still eight or nine percent error on the voicing , as I recall . professor a: what that said is that , sort of , left to its own devices , like without the a strong language model and so forth , that you would you would make significant number of errors just with your  probabilistic machinery in deciding phd b: It also professor a: one oh phd b: Yeah , the though I think  there was one problem with that in that , you know , we used canonical mapping so our truth may not have really been true to the acoustics . Well back twenty years ago when I did this voiced - unvoiced stuff , we were getting more like ninety - seven or ninety - eight percent correct in voicing . professor a: And we did this complex feature selection thing where we looked at all the different possible features one could have for voicing and and and  and exhaustively searched all size subsets and and  for for that particular speaker and you 'd find you know the five or six features which really did well on them . professor a: And then doing doing all of that we could get down to two or three percent error . professor a: So I would I would believe that  it was quite likely that  looking at envelope only , that we 'd be significantly worse than that . phd f: And the all the the SpeechCorders ? what 's the idea behind ? Cuz they they have to Oh , they don't even have to detect voiced spe speech ? professor a: The modern ones don't do a a simple switch . phd f: They just work on the code book professor a: They work on the code book excitation . They try they they try every every possible excitation they have in their code book and find the one that matches best . One of the ideas that we had come up with last week for things to try to improve the system  . Actually I I s we didn't I guess I wrote this in after the meeting b but the thought I had was  looking at the language model that 's used in the HTK recognizer , which is basically just a big loop , grad e:   phd b: and then that can be either go to silence or go to another digit , which That model would allow for the production of infinitely long sequences of digits , right ? professor a: Right . I thought " well I 'm gonna just look at the what actual digit strings do occur in the training data . phd b: And the interesting thing was it turns out that there are no sequences of two - long or three - long digit strings in any of the Aurora training data . So it 's either one , four , five , six ,  up to eleven , and then it skips and then there 's some at sixteen . So I I just for the heck of it , I made a little grammar which  , you know , had it 's separate path for each length digit string you could get . So there was a one - long path and there was a four - long and a five - long professor a:   phd b: So it was you know , I I didn't have any weights of these paths or I didn't have anything like that . phd b: And I played with tweaking the word transition penalties a bunch , but I couldn't go anywhere . I thought " well if I only allow " Yeah , I guess I should have looked at to see how often there was a mistake where a two - long or a three - long path was actually put out as a hypothesis . phd b: So to do that right you 'd probably want to have allow for them all but then have weightings and things
project manager:  I have some points I would like to  some some issues I would like to point out .  first of all ,  if you make minutes yourself as well ,  like Sebastian does ,  could you put them on the shared folder ? If you do not make minutes , no problem , but it's easy for me to see what you  wrote down , user interface: Yeah .  the second thing ,  I was th  s thinking to myself , I have this little remote control , and I'm talking to it , but I still need to point to the television , because it works with infrared . industrial designer: So project manager:  the agenda for now   are there any pre-discussion questions ? marketing: user interface: No . industrial designer: project manager: we wi we will have your individual presentations ,  then the decision on the remote control concept ,  and  the closing . So  I think we we can immedis immediately start with the individual presentations ,  the progress you've made . project manager:  I think it might be smart to look at  Ruud's  information first , because I understood there are some  significant changes in the market situation .  Ease of use is important , but  innovation is more important , and a fancy look and feel is  even more important . And  some fashion watchers have found out that the young target group likes fruit and vegetables in their  clothes , shoes and furniture , user interface: marketing: and that they want spongy material . But we since we are concentrating on  the younger group project manager:  w wait a sec wait a se industrial designer: Oh wait  wait up . project manager:  could you go to the previous slide ?  because I'm taking minutes marketing: 'Kay . The feel of to be spongy industrial designer:  so do you think  when fruit and vegetables are important for clothing and shoes that they are in remote controls also ? marketing: Well ,  one example given was this , so  I assume they just want something colourful . user interface: you said in the p industrial designer: marketing: No ,  the younger group likes  more colourful  objects . marketing: But user interface: I had industrial designer: But can you can you go back to that slide ? The  marketing: Which one ? industrial designer: just one slide back , marketing: This ? industrial designer: no no no . industrial designer: Has it something to do with that  natural feeling also , do you think ? project manager: marketing:  well , it might . project manager: Okay , so so , yeah , it might not be t  it it shouldn't be too hard . marketing: Yeah , and like  the older group likes familiar materials , user interface: Or we could make oh . But since we're conten concentrating on  the younger group , I think we should use soft materials and  make it colourful or  like cell phones , exch exchangeable covers . industrial designer: project manager: Do you know the phone ? industrial designer: I don't know the phone , project manager: It's the Siemens  C_ twenty five , industrial designer: but I can imagine it . project manager: I believe it's it's the one the Post-bank  gave away , user interface:  thirty five . project manager: the very user interface: And the b the light blue and it's also in yellow . project manager: You kn you know , Ruud , as well ? About th marketing: I've seen it , project manager: Okay . Okay , so the the m  important findings are  innovation is more important than ease of use for the our target group . Well , I don't ha really have much to add ,  because most of things we already said in  the previous  discussion .  project manager: Okay , well it's good to to sum up  the things we already thought about . user interface:  the previous ideas were voice recognition and  the round button for  the p channel programming and  volume . These are both with  with voice recognition , but they're very advanced and very high-tech and just  , well , a weird  shape . user interface: So I suggest I couldn't  I had a small  mock-up  sign on the on paper . But it's it's kind of  it's kind of o organic , so that's very good . project manager: And what I'm thinking about , maybe  we should make very light but   a grip   this is how you hold a remote control . project manager:  it shouldn't be too  glatt , too slippery , industrial designer: Slippery . project manager: s because  user interface: But if you have something like  the Siemens phone , it's rubber . There are there are also remote controls who have  a little shape underneath where you can put your fingers in , project manager: Yeah , ex for your fingers , yeah . industrial designer: user interface: Oh and  to add on  Ruud's information , in this  interface we can have  high-tech with the voice recognition and  , well , the the fancy colours and  and so on , and still have the ease of use , because we have an easy interface . user interface: So if you have the voice recognition , you can you can programme like thirty   thirty c  controls on it . marketing: industrial designer: project manager: Okay , b but I think we'll industrial designer: Okay , but I'll I'll go into that , project manager: yeah .  I had a talk with  our manufacturing  division , and  we had a talk about all the different components  who are in this design .  that's the most common  remote con control form  we're used to is just a it ju it's just a box . I c I think you can compare it a little bit with the  big grey image  you had in your presentation . industrial designer: But it's quite  advanced and it's it's quite daring to to use I think . We can use plastic , which is  very slippery and maybe not so nice , but you can give it any colour ,  which is the same for rubber , but it's not slippery . And these latex cases , there's there's just the plastic ones  won't allow the use of solar cells as an energy source source . project manager: user interface: marketing: industrial designer: You really have to imagine like winding up your  user interface: Great . project manager: Well , it would be very new to the market , industrial designer: I d marketing: project manager: but industrial designer: It would be very new , marketing: industrial designer: but it's a kind of a retro  style , I think . So  when you're watching T_V_  or when you're you you have to  make some kind of energy kinetic energy by shaking the remote or throwing it against the wall , whatever you wish . project manager: marketing: industrial designer: It have it it has to move , that's the the sense of it . project manager: I think  , if if I can hook on to that ,  the kinetic thing is very funny . project manager:  solar is of course it's nice , but it's , well , your  your calculator has a solar panel . project manager:  hand dynamo user interface: But if you're watching a movie , how many times  you take the the remote control and and project manager: Well , maybe m user interface: if  if you have a watch , you have the kinetic  idea in a watch also . industrial designer: But you know you know from your own watch your watch uses  a minimal con it consumes a minimal amount of energy . the the shaking of your body , which is almost  every activity makes your  body shake ,  it charges it . So I think  you have a problem when you're watching a movie and  you haven't moved the remote  i remote control in a in an amount of time , and you want t to switch  the channel or something , project manager: Yeah . industrial designer: So , but maybe maybe there's a possibility com to combine it with m  traditional batteries , so we can save on the batteries project manager: Yeah . industrial designer: and  when there's enough kinet kinetic energy , use the kinetic energy , and otherwise use the batteries . project manager: Okay , because I guess the voice recognition feature u consumes quite a f  a lot of power . industrial designer: And we of course have the traditional  solar power , which is just      a piece of material on the remote control which transfers light energy into electricity . The user interface controls ,  of course we have the push-buttons and  we also have scroll-wheels .   in the indicators we have the L_C_D_ displays , which means  you can watch  in a display w which channel you have chosen or something like that of the li amount of volume which is  currently user interface: So we don't really have the the kind of button we had in mind in our   in our last meeting , the the thing with the the round with the four user interface: user interface: But I th I don't think  the scroll-wheels I had some I had some information about it too . user interface: I don't think there's any possibility for us to use scroll-wheels . project manager: Well user interface: I d I can't see  any  scenario where you would use a scroll-wheel with a button on it . What about integrating a scroll-bar on this side ? user interface: Yeah ,  that's a possibility , industrial designer:  it's do it's done before . user interface: But Flores , think about a scenario where y where you would use the scroll-button for project manager: Volume ? industrial designer: Well , it's it well , i what he means is there's an button integrated in the scroll-wheel . project manager:  Ruud , wha what do you thing about  a scroll-bar ?  scroll-wheel . But it's done before ,  there are many other devices  like  telephones and our  radio , pocket radios . industrial designer: And Well , it's it's been done years ago and I don't see it anywhere now . project manager: Nokia has a well , okay , it's not really a scroll-wheel , but on their side th the the volume button is on the side , because you gri grab it like this . user interface: Yeah , I believe  if you have  what we've earlier said ,  the grip  places in in the remote control . You have your hand on one place on the remote control , so you have to place all the buttons in a range of your thumb . user interface: So in that case  the volume button on the side  of the remote control would be perfect .  industrial designer: Okay ,  we have to know , if you want to use  these rubber double-curved c  case ,  you must use these push  push-buttons . We basically have  three types of chips we can use and  these chips incorporate all the Logica and    hardware that is needed to send  to send a signal . So so user interface:  you programme it , you m mute and you g you give  an  an action to it that that's really the mute function industrial designer: okay . user interface: So you say mute , he repeats mute and you makes a computer sound mute , and then goes to the mute function . If we want to use the L_C_D_ display , we really need the advanced version , which is a bit l little bit more costly . And if we don't want to use  any of these  more advanced functions we can keep with the simple  chip , which is a bit cheaper . project manager: d did we already decide on the display ? To industrial designer:  no , but I think that's something for  Roo here to think about . Well , I don't have  I haven't looked for  for information about it , but I don't think information  y I don't think you need it on a display . user interface: Especially when when we have to look at a cost , I don't think  industrial designer: I I don't think either . user interface: 'cause   all any T_V_ can  can  view a digit on  on screen , industrial designer: No . Okay , well project manager: th industrial designer: my conclusion ,  unfortunately the market has decided the a little  other than I thought . I thought  the market would like  a sort m sort of titanium casing , but they seem to like natural  stuff . It's it's more advanced , but I'm I think you should combine it with batteries . project manager: Okay , it's maybe a bit too too flashy , industrial designer: Otherwise it will not too advanced , project manager: too industrial designer:  well . industrial designer: It's in in in some way it can give us an advance , because you will save on your batteries . user interface: But what about  the markets  wants colourfuls  designs ? So if you use titanium project manager: No no , but the   that's what Sebastian said . project manager: No , user interface: And I would think marketing: And project manager: r marketing: yeah , project manager: rubber with colours . industrial designer: Okay ,  well  these scroll-wheels , I think  they they can be they can be handy . user interface: And they can be implemented with a regular chip ? industrial designer: So Yes , they can . But they really need the regular chip , you cannot use the sa simple user interface: Okay , but we also  we already need the regular chip for the sample  sensor speaker industrial designer: Well , I'm not very sure . Maybe that's an  a different user interface: oh , project manager: But but do we want the curved   design , user interface: evalu project manager: or industrial designer: I think so , if you if you stick with the the simple  straight-forward  not curve design , i  it's too dull . industrial designer: And  if you  take the double-curved ,  then you cannot  you can only use the rubber buttons and you cannot use the scroll-wheels . project manager: Okay , what about  the issue I  addressed at the beginning of the meeting ?  the voice function w with the infrared  issue . It's it's  I  I can imagine it's very dull to talk to a device w if you have to point to another device . But project manager: It depends also on your on your user interface: Well , if you if you take your hand before it , okay , it won't work , but you can point it just to the other wall . project manager: But if you have carpets on the wall , which our natural loving friends probably do have , then  yeah , th th it might be a bit more of a issue . industrial designer: I think  it gives us the advantage of user interface: And and the scroll  scroll-wheels . project manager: according to Ruud , the the the market likes  new flashy technology , industrial designer: Technology . project manager: well , ok I know , but it's m it's less  s standard marketing: Standard ? project manager: than than Well , we are not very w we do not know  much about the the f the financial part . project manager: Because if we do have enough  space in in our finance , I would say do integrate it , industrial designer: user interface: But we already have the scroll-wheels , the sp  the speaker  the speak recognition , the rubber , the fancy colours . I think i Ruud , do you have any  anything you would like to  add or or maybe thoughts or marketing: Nah ,  n no , I don't think so . M project manager: No ? Sebast  nee , Roo ? Roo , do you have any other user interface:  no .  the n the next phase will be  the  not the project manager: Sebas industrial designer: what is the next phase f Flores ? project manager: Well , we we need to describe  decisions now . project manager: So  industrial designer: So i project manager: on the energy , well , we decided . project manager: User interface  user interface:  but  can't scroll-wheels  work with one  one-curved case ? Yeah , okay . marketing: user interface: project manager:  and  the I_D_ and the U_I_D_ need to work together on the prototype drawing on the SMARTboard . user interface: The project drawing is for the next industrial designer: So you will be on the Bahamas .  marketing: project manager: Yeah , it's it's  when we come back in thirty minutes ,  you will have a  prototype ready . So can you  give us a summary of all  decisions we've made ? project manager: Yeah ? I can . user interface: But can there be  wor can they work together ? Or do we have to choose between them ? project manager: No , user interface: 'Cause if we have to choose project manager: they can be complementary . industrial designer: Well ,  project manager: Every device user interface: What if not ? industrial designer: It it should be . Okay ,  industrial designer: So project manager: th industrial designer: So   just  the energy source is  the batteries and the solar . What about  the finishing of the case ? We have decided we wanted to use the rubber ? project manager: Yeah , with colourful rubber . project manager:  if it's possible with  different  covers , but I'm not sure if our suppliers can  can help us with  with such   a wish . Don't you think ? project manager: Well , I was more thinking about the fruit colours that the Ruud showed us before .  so maybe it shouldn't even be two colours , it should be a full colour cover with such an image industrial designer:  . project manager: or or  thinking in two colours is is too black and white for our m  c  market group , I guess . marketing: industrial designer: Okay , marketing: industrial designer: but  I'm afraid it's not possible to print a picture on  the device . Just a week ago , a keyboard manufacturer would print , industrial designer: Oh , I've read . industrial designer: And th the they should be spongy also , because they're they're rubber too . marketing: user interface: What what did you say ? industrial designer: Well  you can use well , when you use the buttons , they'll they'll be made of rubber too . Because it  i  what do you touch the button , and what do they want spongy   devices , or or i user interface: Yeah , b But then you just have the the fact that  the drawings on the buttons will disappear eventually . user interface: What I said in the in the first  discussion ,  the digit six on the button , it will disappear when it's from rubber . project manager:  is that  does our our supplier say so ? user interface: It is not  something  it's no information I read about it or so , but it's just from marketing:  didn't did we inc  include the digi digits or  leave them to the speech recognition ? user interface: No , but but  it marketing: 'Cause things like  volume could be  placed next to the button . So still then , if you feel  li  if you feel your remote control , you just rub on the cover , so you rub on the painting . project manager: No no , there's no painting , only  yellow or But it's into the rubber . project manager: Yeah , but this is on the pla user interface: You have to draw the industrial designer: Yes , the signs . project manager: What about  making this rubber and making this plastic ? industrial designer:  I see what you mean . project manager: But the front , on which the the buttons are doesn't have to be rubber . project manager:  industrial designer: Well , I'm I'm not so sure , user interface: Y  can you separate these  these industrial designer: I think it c should be Well , I'm not sure , I have to ask with manufacturing , but I'm I'm not sure that's what you want , because our customers specifically ask for the spongy feel , and that's what you get with rubber . So if you want the spongy feel , you need  to make these buttons all all of rubber . project manager: I know , but do you touch this or do you touch this ? industrial designer: I think both . The side , but do you touch between the the these buttons ? user interface: I think Yes , especially when there are l a few buttons on it , you have  a lot of space to touch . project manager:  because you have to make its prototype , and  yeah y you have the most knowledge about the suppliers , the possibilities and  user interface: Yeah . The chip is is not really industrial designer: The only difference between the advanced and the regular version is that the advanced  version of the chip supports L_C_D_ . project manager: Yeah ? Yeah ,  if you write wrote anything down ,  could you put it on the shared folder ? industrial designer: Okay
user interface: project manager: Okay ? So we are here for the functional design meeting  so first I will show the agenda so we will  I will take notes during this meeting so I will try to summarise it and put that summary in the shared folder if you want to look at it afterwards user interface: project manager: so then  each of you will  lead a presentation on the task that has been required last time so user requirement specification , technical function design and working design . Then we will take  the decision on on the remote control  needed functions and then I will assign you the task for the next part of the meeting . So  who want to start the the presentation of what they did ? industrial designer: F do you want to start ? user interface: Make a start yeah . project manager: You have  PowerPoint ? user interface: Should be in my in their folder no ? project manager: Ah yeah maybe there . industrial designer: With the the whiteboard ? project manager: If you remember yeah user interface: Yeah . So most people want to have a a remote for their hi-fi and T_V_ and stuff like that . user interface: And but other people want th also remotes for controlling  and toys like robotic pets and little robots and stuff industrial designer: user interface: Yeah , so there's a project I think called X_ house or something like that that does that ,  you can integrate your remote with  computers stuff .  and th the buttons part would be  a set of buttons for choosing devices , a set of buttons for special navigation in space , industrial designer: user interface: a set of buttons for linear access of medium and a set of buttons for random access . user interface: Yeah ? industrial designer: What do you mean by linear access then ? user interface: Like a video tape goes forward , backwards ,  fast and stuff yeah . project manager: and there's a fourth one no ? user interface:  ? project manager: So the better now for special navigation ? user interface: Yeah . For special navigation for example you might have a T_V_ in the menu and you going to change yeah ? project manager: Okay . user interface: So if there are common parameters maybe we should put special buttons for that  project manager: Okay . user interface: or maybe we could have everything  generic but  there are a lot of  remotes on the market right now and basically this is most of the almost everybody has this stuff . We could assign any button a command to any button , if we have enough processing power , project manager: Okay . Okay so in our usability lab we observed the remote control use among one hundred subjects project manager:  . marketing: okay ? And here I have the results so you can see that  seventy five per cent of users find most remote controls ugly so we have to find something to make them more more nice , more kind . Eighty hundred per cent of users would spend more money when the remote control would look project manager: user interface: marketing: oh to it's not good . project manager: We can just keep doing that ? marketing: So it's not in theory but I I can I can say yeah . marketing:  and fifty per cents of users say they only use  ten per cents of but of the buttons in the in the remote control . marketing: So all the buttons we we have to put are have to to have  a use a real use project manager: Okay . marketing: and not only or project manager: Okay , so fewer buttons maybe would be good ? marketing: Yeah . user interface: But what kind of remote controls did you look at ? marketing: Sorry ? user interface: What kind of task was it ? It was a T_V_ ? marketing: Yeah . Yeah but in fact we it it seems that we are going to make a T_V_ remote control according to new requirements I received from the management user interface: Huh . marketing: So there are other frustrations expressed by users , so they said  they lost  often the remote control in in the room so they want to have a way to to project manager: Yeah . marketing:  and  lot of the time they it takes too much time to learn how to use a new remote control . marketing: And  remote controls are bad for project manager: What is her other side ? marketing: R_S_I_  user interface: Other side yeah , yo wa your wrist marketing: I dunno . industrial designer: marketing: Okay  before that I I have some some some thing  to say before  project manager: Yeah . marketing: So it's better to put    something very easy to set and  and project manager: Yeah . marketing: and  we asked this question if they prefer an L_C_D_ screen or on their remultific function remotes control project manager: Yeah . So you know that  project manager: marketing: for the younger it's very important project manager: To have L_C_D_ and voice . And  and the others is not so important but  we know that   people between fifteen and twenty five are people who watch a lot T_V_ and  who who wh can use a lot this  . project manager: Moreover th maybe those  like those teenager customer could advice their parents to buy this equipment and so we can user interface:  . So as we say before , I think   a remote control lightening in the dark it's it's a good thing . marketing: e easy to use  a way to find it easily in the room and   resistant to to shock and to to industrial designer: project manager: Okay these are the user requi marketing: I dunno if you see something else important or industrial designer: project manager: industrial designer: I'm just thinking of some thing . industrial designer:  We want to have a no , I don't know if this is a good idea . project manager: Cos it would be costly  and and also it it would take more time to develop to have a a general generic remote control . Because I received that email from management board and they seems to tell that that if we want to be on the market as early as possible we should  focus on T_V_ more where it seems that the market is more important . What's your opinion ? user interface: I have  I've no idea  I should know a bit more about how fast we can  design it . marketing: user interface: I don't think project manager: industrial designer: marketing: user interface:  yeah . industrial designer: But basically yeah maybe I can continue with my presentation , it would be al you you project manager: Okay . project manager: Maybe you can go to the whiteboard if you have some drawings to do industrial designer: If fact project manager: I don't know . project manager: industrial designer: Okay so I'm just going to describe in fact for for a remote control this is quite easy . We just have project manager: user interface: industrial designer: sorry , I'm going project manager: Okay . Let's say that  something like that , which could be  a L_C_D_ let's say or  an array of push button , something like that . So I say U_C_ and I feed that to  L_E_D_ which is  infrared  which is a an infrared  component . industrial designer: Y it's a it's this just a chip which does all the  numerical project manager: Computation . We just need to take to define what we want to do when the user interface  wants something and after that we just do the coding to s and send that to to to the not the to the television .  we just have to define the processing power that we need  especially if we want to do some  speech recognition , in that case that mean that we are going to use more for simple user interface: This will think this will take more time to develop also . project manager: To have a you s you speak about with voi voice control ? industrial designer: No no no no , project manager: Standard button one . project manager: So do you have any idea of how long it would take to have voice recognition now ? user interface: Ten years . project manager: user interface: industrial designer: I would say  about eight months to have the first results . project manager: Even if we have a L_C_D_ display ? industrial designer: Yeah even . So who think it would be good to go for  like speech recognition ? user interface: But we don't have time to market . industrial designer: during the kickoff meeting you say that we we shouldn't we shouldn't go up to twelve point five Euro per unit marketing: project manager: Euros . user interface: How muc how much do you get how much do you if you buy one million units h no , one hundred thousand units . How much will it cost for one hundred thousand ? industrial designer: Usually this is less tha at two dollars per chip . project manager: Because we are user interface: So you have any idea for a powerful one that has  good enough for do speech recognition . Maybe we can  we can look at the new requirement I receive from the management board and discus discuss all function we want to have . industrial designer:  I just had a question  do you want to continue with your presenta ? marketing: project manager: Yeah I I will continue . industrial designer:  you say that I don't remember by heart but thirty per cent marketing:  ? industrial designer: of the tested people say that's it's quite difficult to to to use the remote control . industrial designer: Do they say that this is difficult but for the same reason or do they have other reason ? To to marketing: Oh . industrial designer: maybe to keep in mind maybe to access to that menu you should do something like that . marketing: Would j  yeah w I I think they they say that it's  difficult to learn how to use it but i when you know how to use it , it's it's okay . industrial designer: But yeah maybe and what about if we design a remote control which can be configure as you want ? You say that I want , I have six button user interface: Mh A a lot of people are  if you have the L_C_D_ screen if you can do it completely the way you want because the buttons also look the way you want them industrial designer: Yeah . I think the young people are th  are  marketing: user interface: Christine here said  you have a industrial designer: Yeah . Maybe it would be more complex to configure it to be simple than creating a simple product . user interface: And there are another thing is that if we make something that's simple and easy to use that's bas to use immediately that means that it will be exactly the same as everything else . user interface: Otherwise , if it's different then of course everybody has somebody has to learn to use it first . project manager: But also we we see that that most people find it find remote controls too complex because they have too many buttons and they mainly use only channels and volume buttons . project manager: So we may just  make a very easy to use remote control with mainly those buttons user interface: Yeah . project manager: and maybe also  some lightning stuff too because most people find also hard to to find the remote control . project manager: These these are these two points are the main frustrations so maybe if we design something very simple and easy to  find when lost it will  add  a serious competitive advantage without making something too complex and too long to develop . So we don't have to so this this  is  is  in the this is in the same direction as we were speaking so we don't have to make a very complex remote controls to access teletext and stuff like that user interface: But teletext is just one button . project manager: Yeah but then you have to you have to define the buttons to surf amongst pages and stuff . So well user interface: So will you add with the channel keys , right ? project manager: Yeah . So anyway we don't have to include this feature because it's it's not used any more by users , user interface: So . If if if we want to make it very simple we have to reduce number of buttons compared to th to our competitors . Also  so as as I told before  it would be better if it's only for the T_V_  because we want to be quick on on the market . And then also we have to make very   clear that this  this remote control is is part of of our products and show our corporate  logo and and colours on the on the design as well so that  they identify it as one of our product . marketing: project manager: So before  finishing we can  define  what would be the characteristic of the o th of the control of the remote control and which button do we need which function do we want etcetera . project manager: So do you  so so from from the the Marketing Expert I think a key aspect is the easy to use aspect , it should be very simple and most button are never used marketing:  . project manager: only ten per cent of the button are are used often so I think we have to do something very simple and I think we all agree on that point , no ? industrial designer: user interface: Well if it is going to be just a T_V_ remote control it is going to be very simple . So few buttons , channel , volume control and what el what function do you see in addition to that ? user interface: Well if it's going to be as simple as possible then just have the remote control , there is no other function that I can see project manager: Yeah . project manager: Maybe switch T_V_ on and off user interface:  industrial designer: project manager: user interface: no you want to keep television on so that the advertising can revenue can come back to us . project manager: And that's all ? industrial designer:  I know that som you say that many people are doing plenty of a lot of zapping . user interface: industrial designer: I know tha I discovered that when I did a quick look ,  they do now som they do something which is quite nice now , user interface: It's a memory , yeah . industrial designer: you have a button , you you press it , and this is  the previous channel which has come back . So we have like channel button , the previous channel button , the volume button , plus a mute button , and  just the the traditional on off button . I I talk about that , yeah ? user interface: How should they how should we implement that ? Because  could be numerical only or could be also incremental . This is  incremental , but once you press it for a long time , you go five by five . It's an interesting idea , that if you press it for a long time it does something else , in general . So if you you have your ten buttons for the for the numeric the numerical buttons and you have instead of having just one memory industrial designer: Yeah . project manager: Maybe we should have also a digit button user interface: Maybe we should have a complete keyboard and just type console commands . project manager: I dunno bec because if you have the user interface: Well if it's useful like if if you want to change between three channels for example then you h you cannot you cannot cannot work with just memory being incremental . Because you have your previous channel button if you have incremental only it's not  it isn't worth it because the previous channel is eith either minus one or plus one . project manager: Maybe we we can make very obvious the channel and volume button button and smaller button down there with the the digits . user interface: Yeah when you zap usually you will have to press the same button all the time project manager: Yeah . user interface: Hey I just thought this thing industrial designer: You user interface: there is a  you know there is are some with a wheel like this . project manager: So have a wheel for incremental , have the digits  on the lower side that can be closed so as you say protected , industrial designer: project manager: and  yeah I think this is the basi user interface: On the lower side I think it you have to turn it . industrial designer: Or a or a ball , yeah , not a a wheel but a ball , and you say  to project manager: No , a wheel is better . user interface: So you have to the user has to like to should feel the the the discrete sense a bit . project manager: Well also we have to decide  so it should be lightening in the dark I think because most people lost their remote control . industrial designer: 'S quite it's quite easy we do that w with back light on the on the wheel . Even if i L_E_D_  or a if if it's the L_C_D_ feature  industrial designer: A blue a blue L_E_D_ and we sell that  . project manager: and do we put an L_C_D_ display ? marketing: user interface: Yeah . If you do not multi function then there is no p point in having L_C_D_ . project manager: And so no speech as well because it w it would delay too much the development process user interface: Well if it's going to delay yeah industrial designer: Okay . Because a user could say C_N_N_ for example and it would go C_N_N_ . project manager: and Maybe we can just  industrial designer: Ten years project manager: user interface: project manager: Okay . So  I I will  I will so I we will move to next meeting so in after the lunch break  here are the individual  action  you are required to do industrial designer: project manager: but you will be  recalled to the actions by  email I think but you can take notes if you if you want but well the instruction will be sent . project manager: and I I will make a summary of that meeting that I will put in the shared folder you can't see industrial designer: Okay . marketing: project manager: and  and then you will  you will be able to to see what has been  has been said on on this meeting and and what has been decided . user interface: What is the folder that you put yours in ? And did it it did work ? marketing: No . Okay ? user interface: Okay what is your email ? project manager: So yeah I I'm it's in the first  email so I'm participant one at AMI user interface: At participant one
professor c: Typically when you you 're ab r starting around forty for most people , it starts to harden and then it 's just harder for the lens to shift things phd d: Oh . professor c: and th the the symptom is typically that you you have to hold stuff   further away to to see it . professor c: In fact ,  m my brother 's a gerontological psychologist and he he  came up with an an  a  body age test which  gets down to sort of only three measurements that are good enough st statistical predictors of all the rest of it . grad a: We 're we 're live by the way , so we 've got a good intro here professor c: Oh .  , she 's probably least involved in the signal - processing stuff so maybe we can just just  , I don't think we should go though an elaborate thing , but   Jose and I were just talking about the   , speech e energy thing , phd e: The @ @ professor c: and I  phd e: Yeah . But I think , you know , the the i if I can if you don't mind my my speaking for you for a bit ,   . Right now , that he 's not really showing any kind of  distinction , but  but we discussed a couple of the possible things that  he can look at . And  one is that  this is all in log energy and log energy is basically compressing the distances  between things . He was he he was taking everything over two hundred milliseconds  , and  he 's going to vary that number and also look at moving windows , as we discussed before .  And  and the other thing is that the yeah doing the subtracting off the mean and the variance in the  and dividing it by the standard deviation in the log domain , may not be the right thing to do . grad a: Could you take that mike there ? phd d: Are these the long term means ? Like , over the whole  , the means of what ? grad a: Thanks . professor c:  B Between between phd d: All the frames in the conversation ? professor c: No . professor c: And so i i his his He 's making the constraint it has to be at least two hundred milliseconds . And then he 's he 's  measuring at the frame level still at the frame level , of what phd d: Right .  and But one thing he was pointing out is when he he looked at a bunch of examples in log domain , it is actually pretty hard to see the change . And you can sort of see that , because of j of just putting it on the board that if you sort of have log - X plus log - X , that 's the log of X plus the log of two phd e: Yep . professor c: and it 's just , you know , it it diminishes the effect of having two of them . phd d: But you could do like a C D F there instead ?  , we don't know that the distribution here is normally . So So what I was suggesting to him is that phd d: So just some kind of a simple professor c: Actually , a PDF . professor c: Yeah , but I think also u I think a good first indicator is when the the the researcher looks at examples of the data and can not see a change in how big the the signal is , when the two speaker phd e: Yeah . professor c: doing casual looking and can get the sense , " Hey , there 's something there . And when he 's looking in straight energy he is , so that 's a good place to start .  , when you did the sampling ?  over the speech segments or s or sampling over the the individual channels in order to do the e  the amplitude equalization , did you do it over just the entire everything in the mike channels ? phd e: How professor c: You didn't try to find speech ? grad a: No , I just took over the entire s  entire channel  sampled ten minutes randomly . professor c: And someone who would who would be So the normalization factor probably is i i i is is grad a: Yeah , this was quite quick and dirty , and it was just for listening . So yeah there there there There 's a good chance then given that different people do talk different amounts that there is there there is still a lot more to be gained from gain norm normalization with some sort phd e: Yeah . But we were agreed that in addition to that  there should be s stuff related to pitch and harmonics and so forth . professor c: So we didn't talk at all about  the other derivatives , but  again just just looking at  , I think  Liz has a very good point , that in fact it would be much more graphic just to show Well , actually , you do have some distributions here ,  for these cases . professor c: You have some histograms ,  and  , they don't look very separate . phd e: This is the the first derivate of log of frame energy  without any kind of normalization . grad a: Except that it 's hard to judge this because the they 're not normalized . phd d: W  , what I meant is , even if you use linear , you know , raw measures , like raw energy or whatever , professor c: " Number " phd d: maybe we shouldn't make any assumptions about the distribution 's shape , and just use you know , use the distribution to model the the mean , or what y you know , rather than the mean take some professor c: Yeah . grad a: Interesting phd e: Here I I professor c: Oh that yeah that 's a good q phd e: in No I I I haven't the result professor c: did did you have this sort of thing , for just the just the l r  the the unnormalized log energy ? OK . professor c: That 's a phd d: Well it might be just good to know what it looks like . That 's That 's  cuz I 'd mentioned scatter plots before but she 's right , phd d: Cuz phd e: Huh ? professor c: even before you get the scatter plots , just looking at a single feature  , looking at the distribution , is a good thing to do . professor c: Yeah , but but what she 's saying is , which is right , is le phd e: combination of two , of energy and derivate professor c: let 's start with the Before we get complicated , let 's start with the most basic wh thing , which is we 're arguing that if you take energy  if you look at the energy , that , when two people are speaking at the same time , usually there 'll be more energy than when one is right ? phd e: Yeah . professor c: And the first way you 'd look at that ,  s she 's , you know , absolutely right , is that you would just take a look at the distribution of those two things , much as you 've plotted them here , phd e: Yeah . professor c: So ,  with three colors or three shades or whatever , just just look at those distributions . professor c: And then , given that as a base , you can see if that gets improved , you know , or or or worsened by the looking at regular energy , looking at log energy , we were just proposing that maybe it 's you know , it 's harder to see with the log energy ,  and  also these different normalizations , does a particular choice of normalization make it better ? phd e: Yeah . professor c: But I had maybe made it too complicated by suggesting early on , that you look at scatter plots because that 's looking at a distribution in two dimensions . professor c:  And then we w I think we 're agreed that pitch - related things are are are going to be a a really likely candidate to help . professor c:  But since  your intuition from looking at some of the data , is that when you looked at the regular energy , that it did in fact usually go up , when two people were talking , that 's eh you know , you should be able to come up with a measure which will match your intuition . professor c: And she 's right , that a that having a having having this table , with a whole bunch of things , with the standard deviation , the variance and so forth , it 's it 's it 's harder to interpret than just looking at the the same kind of picture you have here . But It it 's curious but  I f I found it in the in the mixed file , in one channel that eh in several oh e eh several times eh you have an speaker talking alone with a high level of energy professor c:   phd e: eh in the middle eh a zone of overlapping with mmm less energy professor c:   So there 'll be some cases for which phd e: Because there reach very many professor c: But , the qu So So they 'll be phd d: Right . professor c: This is I w want to point to visual things , But  they there 'll be time There 'll be overlap between the distributions , but the question is , " If it 's a reasonable feature at all , there 's some separation . grad a: And I was just going to say that that right now we 're just exploring . I grad a: What you would imagine eventually , is that you 'll feed all of these features into some discriminative system . grad a: And so even if if one of the features does a good job at one type of overlap , another feature might do a good job at another type of overlap .  the the reason I had suggested the scatter f p features is I used to do this a lot , when we had thirteen or fifteen or twenty features to look at . phd e: Yeah , this is the professor c:  Because something is a good feature  by itself , you don't really know how it 'll behave in combination and so it 's nice to have as many as many together at the same time as possible in  in some reasonable visual form . There 's cool graphic things people have had sometimes to put together three or four in some funny funny way . But it 's true that you shouldn't do any of that unless you know that the individual ones , at least , have have some  some hope phd e: Yeah . phd d: it 's really important to pick a normalization that matches the distribution for that feature . phd d: And it may not be the same for all the types of overlaps or the windows may not be the same . e Actually , I was wondering , right now you 're taking a all of the speech , from the whole meeting , and you 're trying to find points of overlap , but we don't really know which speaker is overlapping with which speaker , professor c: Right . phd d: right ? So  another way would just be to take the speech from just , say , Morgan , And just Jane and then just their overlaps , phd e: Yeah . phd d: like but by hand , by cheating , and looking at you know , if you can detect something that way , because if we can't do it that way , there 's no good way that we 're going to be able to do it . phd d: That You know , there might be something helpful and cleaner about looking at just individuals and then that combination alone . So if I don't know , if you go through and you find Adam , cuz he has a lot of overlaps and some other speaker who also has e enough speech phd e: Yeah . phd d: and just sort of look at those three cases of Adam and the other person and the overlaps , phd e: Yeah . phd d: maybe and just look at the distributions , maybe there is a clear pattern phd e: Yeah . phd d: but we just can't see it because there 's too many combinations of of people that can overlap . postdoc b: I think it 's to start with it 's s your your idea of simplifying , starting with something that you can see eh you know without the extra layers of phd d: Right . Cuz if energy doesn't matter there , like I don't think this is true , but what if phd e: To study individual ? postdoc b: Sorry , what ? phd d:  ? phd e: To study individual ? postdoc b: Well , you you you don't have to study everybody individually phd d: Well , to study the simplest case to get rid of extra phd e: The the the But Consider postdoc b: but just simple case and the one that has the lot of data associated with it . Cuz what if it 's the case and I don't think this is true grad a: That was a great overlap by the way . phd d: What if it 's the case that when two people overlap they equate their you know , there 's a conservation of energy and everybody both people talk more softly ? I don't think this happens at all . postdoc b: Or or what if what if the equipment what if the equipment adjusts somehow , phd d: Or they get louder . postdoc b: there 's some equalizing in there ? phd d: Yeah or professor c: no we don't have that . grad a: Well , but But I think that 's what I was saying about different types of overlap . phd d: There are there are different types , and within those types , like as Jose was saying , that sounded like a backchannel overlap , meaning the kind that 's a friendly encouragement , like "    , but , some of those , as you showed , I think can be discriminated by the duration of the overlap . It Actually the s new student , Don , who  Adam has met , and he was at one of our meetings He 's getting his feet wet and then he 'll be starting again in mid - January . phd d: and So maybe phd e: This is a s a general studio of the overlapping we 're studying the i professor c: Yeah . Well I I I I would s actually still recommend that he do the overall thing phd d: So it might be something that we can help by categorizing some of them and then , you know , look at that . professor c: he has the histogram mechanism , he has the stuff that subtracts out and all he has to do is change it   from from log to plain energy and plot the histogram and look at it . And then he should go on and do the other stuff bec but But this will phd d: Yeah . I didn't mean that that for you to do that , but I was thinking if if Don and I are trying to get categories professor c:   phd d: and we label some data for you , and we say this is what we think is going So you don't have to worry about it . phd e: Consider different class of overlap ? phd d: Yeah , that we would be working on anyway . phd d: Then maybe you can try some different things for those three cases , and see if that helps , or phd e: Yeah . This is the thing I I comment with you before , that  we have a great variation of th situation of overlapping . phd e: And the behavior for energy is ,  log energy , is not  the same all the time . phd e: And professor c: But I guess I was just saying that that right now  from the means that you gave , I don't have any sense of whether even , you know , there are any significant number of cases for which there is distinct and I would imagine there should be some you know , there should be The distributions should be somewhat separated . professor c:  and I I would still guess that if they are not separated at all , that there 's some there 's there 's most likely something wrong in the way that we 're measuring it . professor c: but  For instance ,  I wouldn't expect that it was very common overall , that when two people were talking at the same time , that it would that it really was lower , phd e: Yeah . phd d: or a sort of , a case where where you would never know that unless you actually go and look at two individuals . phd d: It might the case , though , that the significant energy , just as Jose was saying , comes in the non - backchannel cases . Because in back Most people when they 're talking don't change their own energy when they get a backchannel , cuz they 're not really predicting the backchannel . professor c: e e and and again what they what difference there was would kind of be lost in taking the log , phd d: and the backchannels are sort of easy to spot s in terms of their words or  , just listen to it . phd d: It just professor c: Mmm , no , if it 's if i if it 's grad a: Tone professor c: Well , it won't be as big . phd d: even if you take the log , you can your model just has a more sensitive measures . grad a: You could imagine doing specialized ones for different types of backchannels , if you could if you had a good model for it . professor c: If if you 're a I guess my point is , if you 're doing essentially a linear separation , taking the log first does in fact make it harder to separate . professor c: So it 's So ,  if you i i So i if there if there close to things it does phd e: Yeah . And right now we 're essentially doing this linear thing by looking across here and and saying we 're going to cut it here . But anyway , yeah , we 're not disagreeing on any of this , we should look at it more  more finely , but   I think that This often happens , you do fairly complicated things , and then you stand back from them and you realize that you haven't done something simple . So  , if you generated something like that just for the energy and see , and then , a a a as as Liz says , when they g have   smaller  , more coherent groups to look at , that would be another interesting thing later . professor c: And then that should give us some indication between those , should give us some indication of whether there 's anything to be achieved f from energy at all . But then the Have you started looking at the pitch related stuff at all , or ? Pitch related ? phd e: The ? professor c: Harmonicity and so on ? phd e: I I 'm preparing the the program but I don't I don't begin because eh I saw your email professor c: Preparing to Yeah . phd e: and I agree with you it 's better to I suppose it 's better to to consider the the energy this kind of parameter bef professor c: Yeah . I I I I Well , we certainly should see this but I I I I think that the harm I certainly wasn't saying this was better than the harmonicity and pitch related things I was just saying phd e: I I go on with the with the pitch , professor c: Yeah . professor c: Yeah , I was just saying phd e: I I I I understood  that eh I I had to finish by the moment with the and and concentrate my my energy in that problem . But I think , like , all these derivatives and second derivatives and all these other very fancy things , I think I would just sort of look at the energy and then get into the harmonicity as as a suggestion . So maybe  since w we 're trying to  compress the meeting , I know Adam had some form stuff he wanted to talk about and did you have some ? postdoc b: I wanted to ask just s something on the end of this top topic . So , when I presented my results about the  distribution of overlaps and the speakers and the profiles of the speakers , at the bottom of that I did have a proposal , phd e:  - huh . postdoc b: and I had plan to go through with it , of of co coding the types of overlaps that people were involved in s just with reference to speaker style so , you know , with reference phd d: Oh . postdoc b: and you know I said that on my in my summary , phd d: That 'd be great . postdoc b: that you know so it 's like people may have different amounts of being overlapped with or overlapping phd d: Yeah , I remem Right . postdoc b: but that in itself is not informative without knowing what types of overlaps they 're involved in so I was planning to do a taxonomy of types overlaps with reference to that . postdoc b: So , but it you know it 's like it sounds like you also have  something in that direction . postdoc b: Is is it phd d: We have nothing You know , basically , we got his environment set up . It 's mostly that , if we had to label it ourselves , we we would or we 'd have to , to get started , but if It it would be much better if you can do it . You 'd be much better at doing it also because you know , I I 'm not I don't have a good feel for how they should be sorted out , postdoc b: Interesting . phd d: and I really didn't wanna go into that if I didn't have to . So if If you 're w willing to do that or or grad a: It would be interesting , though , to talk , maybe not at the meeting , but at some other time about what are the classes . phd d: I think that 's a research effort in and of itself , phd e: Yeah . phd d: because you can read the literature , but I don't know how it 'll turn out phd e: Yeah . postdoc b: It seems like we also s with reference to a purpose , too , that we we 'd want to have them coded . phd d: And we 'd still have some funding for this project , phd e:   phd d: like probably , if we had to hire some like an undergrad , because  Don is being covered half time on something else postdoc b:   phd d: he we 're not paying him the full RA - ship for all the time .  If we got it to where we wanted we needed someone to do that I don't think there 's really enough data where where postdoc b:   Yeah , I see this as a prototype , to use the only the the already transcribed meeting as just a prototype . phd e: I I think a a another parameter we c we we can consider is eh the duration . Because is possible eh some s s  eh some classes eh has eh a type of a duration , eh , a duration very short  when we have we have overlapping with speech . And it 's interesting , I think , to consider the the window of normalization , normalization window . Eh because eh if we have a type of , a kind of eh overlap , eh backchannel overlap , with a short duration , is possible eh to normali i i that if we normalize eh with eh eh consider only the the eh window eh by the left eh ri eh side on the right side overlapping with a a very eh oh a small window eh the if the fit of normalization is eh mmm bigger eh in that overlapping zone eh very short postdoc b:    that you have eh you have a backchannel , eh , eh you have a overlapping zone very short phd d: Yeah . phd e: and you consider eh n eh all the channel to normalize this very short eh professor c:   phd e: for example " mmm  -   " eh And the energy is not eh height eh I think if you consider all the channel to normalize and the channel is mmm bigger eh eh eh compared with the with the overlapping eh duration , professor c:   phd e: eh the effect is mmm stronger eh that I  the the e effect of the normalization eh with the mean and the and the variance eh is different that if you consider only a window compared eh with the n the duration of overlapping . phd e: Is s If phd d: Well it 's a sliding window , right ? So if you take the the measure in the center of the overlapped piece , you know , there 'd better be some something . phd d: But if your window is really huge then yeah you 're right you won't even phd e: Yeah , This is the This is the the idea , to consider only the the small window near near near the the overlapping zone . You know , you shouldn't be more than like You should definitely not be three times as big as your as your backchannel . And hopefully it 's more like on the order of professor c: I 'm not sure that 's necessarily true . professor c: Because because it because  again if you 're just compensating for the gain , phd d: Yea phd e: Yeah . professor c: you know , the fact that this this gain thing was crude , and the gain wh if someone is speaking relatively at consistent level , just to to give a an extreme example , all you 're doing is compensating for that . And then you still s And then if you look at the frame with respect to that , it still should should  change phd d: Yeah , it depends how different your normalization is , as you slide your window across . postdoc b: It 's possible to try it both ways , grad a: Well ,  we 're also talking about a couple of different things . postdoc b: isn't it ? in this small grad a: one is your analysis window and then the other is any sort of normalization that you 're doing . phd d: But it is definitely true that we need to have the time marks , phd e: Yeah . phd d: and I was assuming that will be inherited because , if you have the words and they 're roughly aligned in time via forced alignment or whatever we end up using , then you know , this student and I would be looking at the time marks postdoc b: Yep , I agree . Coming off of the other phd d: and classifying all the frames inside those as whatever labels Jane gave phd e: Yeah . phd d:  phd e: I can give you my transcription file , postdoc b: I was thinking that that would come from the engineering side , phd d: I don't think you need to . That should be linked to the words which are linked to time somehow , postdoc b: There you go . grad a:  If it 's not hand - marked then we 're not going to get the times . phd d: Well , it 's something that w Well , we we wouldn't be able to do any work without a forced alignment anyway , phd e: Yes phd d: so somehow if once he gets going we 're gonna hafta come up with one professor c: Yes . professor c: Well again for the close mike stuff , we could come up take a s take the Switchboard system or something , grad a: That might be good enough . professor c: Just , you know , low - pass filter the speech and phd d: Cuz there 's there 's a lot of work you can't do without that , how how would you professor c: Yeah . phd d: You 'd have to go in and measure every start and stop point next to a word grad a: Yep . But , should talk about our options as far as the   transcription grad a: Yep , if IBM doesn't professor c: But . postdoc b: How So it 's two pages per person ? grad a: Nope . postdoc b: Oh ! grad a: So one is a one time only speaker form and the other is the digits .  why did you switch the order of the Date and Time fields ? This is rather a low - level , but grad a: On which one ? postdoc b: On on the new one , Time comes first and then Date , but I thought grad a: Oh you mean on the digit form ? postdoc b: This is this is rather a low level question , but but it used used to be Date came first . postdoc b: Well , how would the How would the user know the time if they didn't know the date ? grad a: It 's an interesting observation , but it was intentional . Because the date is when you actually read the digits and the time and , excuse me , the time is when you actually read the digits , but I 'm filling out the date beforehand . If you look at the form in front of you ? that you 're going to fill out when you read the digits ? you 'll see I 've already filled in the date but not the time . I always assumed So the time is supposed to be pretty exact , because I 've just been taking beginning time time of the meeting . grad a: The the reason I put the time in , is so that the person who 's extracting the digits , meaning me , will know where to look in the meeting , to try to find the digits . professor c: Why What what were you putting in ? postdoc b: Oh , well , I was saying if we started the meeting at two thirty , phd e: Yeah . postdoc b: I 'd put two thirty , and I guess d e everyone was putting two thirty , professor c: Oh . postdoc b: and I didn't realize there was "  oh I 'm about to read this and I should " grad a: Actually it 's about one third each . About one third of them are blank , about one third of them are when the digits are read , and about one third of them are when the meeting starts . postdoc b: This would be a radical suggestion but grad a: I could put instructions ? Nah . postdoc b: Ei - either that or maybe you could maybe write down when people start reading digits on that particular session . grad a: But if I 'm not at the meeting , I can't do that . professor c: For some reason he doesn't want to sit through every meeting that 's grad a: Yep , but that is the reason Name , Email and Time are where they are . phd e: " use only " postdoc b: Actually you could Well that does raise another question , which is why is the " Professional use only " line not higher ? Why doesn't it come in at the point of Date and Seat ? Oh . grad a: What ? professor c: What ? postdoc b: Well , because If y your your professional use , you 're gonna already have the date , and the s grad a: What which form are you talking about ? postdoc b: Well I 'm comparing the new one with the old one . grad a: The digit form doesn't The digit postdoc b: Oh ! I wasn't supposed to phd e: Yeah . grad a: So on the digits form , everything above the line is a fill - in form postdoc b: Sorry about that . Alright s but I didn't mean to derail our discussion here , so you really wanted to start with this other form . grad a: No , either way is fine I just You just started talking about something , and I didn't know which form you were referring to . postdoc b: Alright yeah , I was comparing so th this is So I was looking at the change first . So it 's like we started with this and now we 've got a new version of it wi with reference to this . professor c: So the main thing that the person fills out  is the name and email and time ? phd e: Yeah . postdoc b: What And there 's an addition of the native language , which is a bit redundant . grad a: That 's because the one , the digit form that has native language is the old form not the new form . professor c: " South Midland , North Midland " postdoc b: That 's the old and that 's the new . grad a: Yeah this was the problem with these categories , I I picked those categories from TIMIT . phd d: Actually , the only way I know is from working with the database and having to figure it out . grad a: So , I was gonna ask phd e: What i professor c: So is South Midland like Kansas ? grad a: wh w  . grad a: So so what accent are we speaking ? Western ? professor c: By definition ? phd e: And for simple for for me ? professor c: Well , phd d: Probably Western , yeah . phd e: Is mean my native language Spanish Spanish ? eh The original is the center of Spain and the beca grad a: Yeah ,  you could call it whatever you want . phd e: Because is different , the Span -  the Spanish language from the the north of Spain , of the south , of the west and the grad a: Sure . grad a: So I 'm not sure what to do about the Region field for English variety . You know , when I wrote I was writing those down , I was thinking , " You know , these are great if you 're a linguist " . grad a: But I don't know how to I don't know how to I don't know how to categorize them . professor c: If you 're if e if y phd d: This wasn't developed by th these regions weren't professor c: if you 're a TI or MIT from nineteen eighty - five . grad a: Yeah So I guess my only question was if if you were a South Midland speaking region , person ? Would you know it ? professor c: Yeah . grad a: Is that what you would call yourself ? phd d: I don't know . professor c: You know , I think if you 're talking if you 're thinking in terms of places , as opposed to names different peop names people have given to different ways of talking , I would think North Midwest , and South Midwest would be more common than saying Midland , right , I I went to s phd d: Yeah . Now the usage Maybe we can give them a li like a little map ? with the regions and they just No , I 'm serious . phd d: Because it takes less time , and it 's sort of cute phd e: i at this in that side in that side of the the paper . phd d: Well just a little You know , it doesn't have all the detail , but you sort of professor c: But what if you moved five times and and  postdoc b: Well , I was thinking you could have ma multiple ones and then the amount of time phd d: No , but you 're categorized . You could say , you know " ten years on the east coast , five years on the west coast " or something or other . grad a: Well , We I think we don't want to get that level of detail at this form . phd d:  I As I said , I don't think there 's a huge benefit to this region thing . It it gets The problem is that for some things it 's really clear and usually listening to it you can tell right away if it 's a New York or Boston accent , but New York and Boston are two well , I guess they have the NYC , but New England has a bunch of very different dialects and postdoc b:   grad a: Yeah , so I picked these regions cuz we had talked about TIMIT , and those are right from TIMIT . And so these would be satisfying like a speech research community if we released the database , grad a: So . phd d: but as to whether subjects know where they 're from , I 'm not sure because  I know that they had to fill this out for Switchboard . phd d: Also Northwest you 've got Oreg - Washington and Oregon now which  y people don't know if it 's western or northern . phd d: It 's like Northwest grad a: Am I speaking Am I speaking Western ? professor c: Oh , what is Northern ? Well and what and what 's Northern ? phd d: I think originally it was North Northwest grad a: Northwest ? phd d: But phd e: Yeah . And and so I would think I would say , I 've I 've got a mix of California and Ohio . grad a: I c I think at the first level , for example , we speak the same . grad a: a techno - speak accent ? phd d: Yeah , you know ? phd e: A techno grad a: A a geek region ? phd d: Well it 's  I you can sort of identify postdoc b: Geek region . phd d: it f It 's it 's not not that that 's phd e: Is different . phd d: but but maybe that maybe we could leave this and see what people See what people choose and then  let them just fill in if they don't  I don't know what else we can do , cuz That 's North Midland . postdoc b: I 'm wondering about a question like , " Where are you from mostly ? " phd e: Yeah . professor c: But I I 'm s I 'm now that you mentioned it though , I am really am confused by " Northern " . professor c: If you 're i if you 're postdoc b: Scandinavian , the Minnesota area 's north . professor c: right ? postdoc b:  professor c: And and and Oregon and and Oregon and Washington are are Western , but they 're also Northern . professor c: Maybe Maybe we Maybe we should put a little map and say " put an X on where you 're from " , phd d: No , that 's phd e: And is in those grad a: Yeah really . phd e: And if you put postdoc b: It 'd be pretty simple , yeah . If you put eh the state ? grad a: Well well we sort of postdoc b: Where are you from mostly ? phd d: We we went we went around this and then a lot of people ended up saying that it phd e:  - huh . grad a: Well , I like the idea of asking " what variety of English do you speak " as opposed to where you 're from Because th if we start asking where we 're from , again you have to start saying , " well , is that the language you speak or is that just where you 're from ? " phd e: Yeah . phd d:  it gives us good information on where they 're from , but that doesn't tell us anything grad a: And professor c: We could always ask them if they 're from phd d: well , enough about their grad a:  . So so I would say Germany phd d: like grad a: You know am I speaking with German accent postdoc b: Oh . postdoc b: Well , see , I 'm thinking " Where are you from mostly " phd d: Right . postdoc b: because , you know , then you have some some kind of subjective amount of time factored into it . grad a:  there 's not a lot of r of room professor c: I 'd say , " Boston , New York City , the South and Regular " . grad a: I think of those , Northern is the only one that I don't even know what they 're meaning . phd e: And And  And usually here people here know what is their kind of mmm lang English language ? professor c: That 's a joke . Right ? We can make up our own So we can say " Northwest " , " Rest of West " or something . postdoc b: I professor c: " Do you come from the Louisiana Purchase ? " phd d: So we could take out " North " " Northern " . phd e: eh here Is easy for people to know ? phd d: That 's Yeah , w It 's In It 's it 's harder in America anywhere else , basically . postdoc b: I can't do it , but phd e: Or Boston ? professor c: Yeah . phd d: They know they don't speak the same as the grad a: But is Boston New England ? postdoc b: And they 're proud of it . phd e:  phd d: But that 's why they have New York City but postdoc b: Well , we ca Well , why can't we just say characterize something like char characterize your accent professor c: Well , Boston 's @ @ , too . " postdoc b: and and so I would say , " I don't know " . Right , which probably means you have a very postdoc b: But someone from Boston with a really strong coloration would know . And so would an R - less Maine or something , phd d: And that 's actually good . phd d: I was I was thinking of something along that line professor c: How postdoc b: Good . phd d: because if you don't know , then , you know , ruling out the fact that you 're totally inept or something , postdoc b:  . phd d: if somebody doesn't know , it probably means their accent isn't very strong compared to the sort of midwest standard . professor c: Well , it wasn't that long ago that we had somebody here who was from Texas who was absolutely sure that he didn't have any accent left . I I would say more more sweepingly , " how would you characterize your accent ? " phd e: Yeah . grad a: So you want to change the instructions also not just say region ? phd d: W postdoc b: Well , I think this discussion has made me think that 's s something to consider . grad a: I don't know if I if I read this form , I think they 're going to ask it they 're going to answer the same way if you say , " What 's variety of English do you speak ? Region . " as if you say " what variety of region region do you speak ? Please characterize your accent ? " They 're going to answer the same way . grad a: Well what we talked about with that is is so that they would understand the granularity . postdoc b: Yes , but if , as Liz is suggesting , people who have strong accents know that they do grad a:  that 's what I had before , and you told me to list the regions to list them . phd d:  we we professor c: Yeah last week last week I was sort of r arguing for having it wide open , but then everybody said " Oh , no , but then it will be hard to interpret because some people will say Cincinnati and some will say Ohio " . phd d: What if we put in both ? grad a: That 's what the " Other " is for . phd d: And Would people No ,  what if we put in both ways of asking them ? So . One is Region and the another one is " if you had to characterize yourself your accent , what would you say ? " grad a: Won't they answer the same thing ? phd d: Well they might only answer only one of the questions but if postdoc b: Yeah that 's fine . postdoc b: They might say " Other " for Region because they don't know what category to use phd d: Actually postdoc b: but they might have something phd d: Right . phd d: It just And we we might learn from what they say , as to which one 's a better way to ask it . professor c: W This is just a small thing phd d: But I Cuz I really don't know .  professor c: but  It says " Variety " and then it gives things that e have American as one of the choices . But then it says " Region " , but Region actually just applies to  , US , grad a: Right . professor c: right ? grad a:  that 's why I put the " Other " in . We just We sort of thought , " yes , " y y  professor c: S postdoc b: At the last meeting , my recollection was that we felt people would have  less that that there are so many types and varieties of these other languages and we are not going to have that many subjects from these different language groups grad a: Yep . grad a: So  , I  the way I had it last time was Region was blank , postdoc b: That 's what I thought . grad a: And and I think that that 's the best way to do it , postdoc b: Yeah . grad a: because because of the problems we 're talking about but what we said last week , was no , put in a list , so I put in a list . grad a: Well , certainly dropping " Northern " I think is right , because none of us know what that is . phd d: Cuz ,  And keeping " Other " , and then maybe this North Midland , we call it " North Midwest " . Does that make sense ? phd e: South Midwest ? phd d: That would help me professor c: U unless you 're from Midland , Kansas . phd d: I don't know where Midland is professor c: There 's a Or Midland Midland grad a: Is " Midwest " one word ? professor c: Is it Midland Midland Midland , Texas or Midland , Kansas ? I forget . It 's just one big shebang , where , of course , you have huge variation in dialects , grad a: But that 's true of New England too . I was going to say the only one that doesn't have a huge variety is New York City . I I would think that these categories would be more w would be easier for an an analyst to put in rather than the subject himself . professor c: U grad a: I think that that was what happened with TIMIT , was that it was an analyst . Where does Where does d w Where Where 's where does  New New York west of west of  New York City and Pennsylvania  and  phd d: Yeah , I don't know how it came from . Pennsylvania is not grad a: " Other " , it goes under " Other " , definitely under " Other " . phd d: Well , you know , Pennsylvania has a pretty strong dialect and it 's totally different than professor c: Pennsylvania Yeah . and  New Jersey is not New England and Maryland is not New England and none of those are the South . Rather than have circle fill in forms , say " Region , open paren , E G Southern comma Western comma close paren colon . grad a: Is that a real accent ? postdoc b: Sure , yeah ! grad a: How do you spell it ? phd e: Yeah . Because that get 's at both of the things we were trying to do , professor c: OK . grad a: the granularity , and the person can just self - assess and we don't have to argue about what these regions are . postdoc b: So you have native language , you have region , and then you have time spent in English speaking country . Now , I wonder if it might be useful to have another open field saying " which one parenthesis S paren closed parenthesis " . postdoc b: It doesn't have to be ex all at all exact , just in the same open field format that you have .  s e Any any other  open mike topics or should we go right to the digits ? grad a: did you guys get my email on the multitrans ? That OK . postdoc b: So you this is n Dan 's patches , Dan Ellis 's patches . grad a: The what the ones I applied , that you can actually do are Dan 's , because it doesn't slow it down . phd d: M postdoc b: Fantastic ! grad a: Just uses a lot of memory . phd d: So when you say " slow " , does that mean to grad a: No , the the one that 's installed is fine . Which , instead of having the one pane with the one view , It has multiple panes with the views . grad a: But the problem with it is the drawing of those waveforms is so slow that every time you do anything it just crawls . phd d: It 's So , it it 's the redrawing of the w postdoc b: That 's a consideration . postdoc b: And this 'll be a hav having the multiwave will be a big help cuz in terms of like disentangling overlaps and things , that 'll be a big help . postdoc b: e so you e the patches that you grad a: No , he suggested that , but he didn't It 's not installed . phd d: So is there any hope for actually displaying the wave form ? grad a: not if we 're going to use Tcl - TK At least not if we 're going to use Snack . And it 's useful to have the grad a: Why don't we we see how Dan 's works and if it If we really need the display phd d: Yeah . And it 's just , you know , a a uni - dimensional feature , varying in time . phd d: Right ? grad a: We we could do that but that would mean changing the code . grad a: This is a program that we got from someone else , and we 've done patches on . professor c: If there was some Is there some way to have someone write patches in something faster and and link it in , or something ? phd d: That 's grad a: Not easily . grad a: Let 's try it with Dan 's and if that isn't enough , we can do it otherwise . grad a: I think it is , cuz when I was playing with it , the mixed signal has it all in there . And so it 's really It 's not too bad to find places in the in the stream where things are happening . postdoc b: And it 's also also the case that that  this multi - wave thing is proposed to the phd e:  ? postdoc b: So . postdoc b: They said that the only reason they hadn't had the multi the parallel  stream one before was simply that they hadn't had time to do it . grad a: And if if professor c: They may well have not had much demand for it . You mean they could they could do it and it would be fast enough if they do it ? phd e: Yeah . I just mean I just mean that it 's that that his phd d: Or ? phd e: Oh . This one that we now have does have the status of potentially being incorporated l likely being incorporated into the central code . postdoc b: Now , tha Now , if we develop further then , y  , I don't grad a: I think if if if one of us sat down and coded it , so that it could be displayed fast enough I 'm sure they would be quite willing to incorporate it . postdoc b:  it 's I think it 's a nice feature to have it set that way . postdoc b: I just like the idea of it being something that 's , you know , tied back into the original , so that other people can benefit from it . I also understand that you can have widgets that are very useful for their purpose and that you don't need to always go that w route . Let 's do digits , and then we 'll turn off the mikes , and then I have one other thing to discuss . phd d: so I can Well , I can wait for the digits but I can't stay for the discussion grad a: Well , you want to go first ? Or . postdoc b: Well , should we e should we switch off the g professor c: Well , we 'll talk to you about it  grad a: Do you wanna go do digits or do you wanna just skip digits ? phd d:  . phd d: But if there 's something on the rest of the I 'm I 'll be around just have to make call before quarter of . postdoc b: Ke grad a: Why don't you read the digits ? professor c: Yeah , why don't you read the digits and then you can go
professor e: I was saying Hynek 'll be here next week , Wednesday through Friday  , through Saturday , and , I won't be here Thursday and Friday . But my suggestion is that , at least for this meeting , people should go ahead , cuz Hynek will be here , and , you know , we don't have any Czech accent yet , as far as I know , so There we go . So other than reading digits , what 's our agenda ? phd f: I don't really have , anything new . Do you think that would be the case for next week also ? Or is is ,  ? What 's your projection on ? phd f:  . professor e: Cuz the one thing the one thing that seems to me we really should try , if you hadn't tried it before , because it hadn't occurred to me it was sort of an obvious thing is , adjusting the , sca the scaling and , insertion penalty sorta stuff . phd f: And , so I 've tried playing around a little bit with , the insertion penalties and things like that . So , i it it 's not the direction that you were working with that we were saying what 's the  , what 's the best you can do with with mel cepstrum . professor e: which , I guess So , to first order  , you have other things you were gonna do , but to first order , I would say that the conclusion is that if you , do , some monkeying around with , the exact HTK training and @ @ with , you know , how many states and so forth , that it it doesn't particularly improve the performance . In other words , that even though it sounds pretty dumb , just applying the same number of states to everything , more or less , no matter what language , isn't so bad . Right ? And I guess you hadn't gotten to all the experiments you wanted to do with number of Gaussians , phd f: Right . professor e: but , let 's just If we had to if we had to draw a conclusion on the information we have so far , we 'd say something like that . professor e: so the next question to ask , which is I think the one that that that Andreas was dre addressing himself to in the lunch meeting , is , we 're not supposed to adjust the back - end , but anybody using the system would . professor e: So , if you were just adjusting the back - end , how much better would you do , in noise ?  , because the language scaling and insertion penalties and so forth are probably set to be about right for mel cepstrum . professor e: But , they 're probably not at all set right for these things , particularly these things that look over , larger time windows , in one way or another with with LDA and KLT and neural nets and all these things . In the fa past we 've always found that we had to increase the insertion penalty to to correspond to such things . So , I think that 's , @ @ that 's kind of a first - order thing that that we should try . phd f: So for th so the experiment is to , run our front - end like normal , with the default , insertion penalties and so forth , and then tweak that a little bit and see how much of a difference it makes professor e: So by " our front - end "  take , you know , the Aurora - two s take some version that Stephane has that is , you know , our current best version of something .  , y don't wanna do this over a hundred different things that they 've tried but , you know , for some version that you say is a good one . You say you you have for the noisy How about for the for the mismatched or or or or the or the medium mismatched conditions ? Have you ? When you adjusted those numbers for mel cepstrum , did it ? phd f: I I don't remember off the top of my head . I would need to Well , I did write down ,  So , when I was doing I just wrote down some numbers for the well - matched case . Looking at the I wrote down what the deletions , substitutions , and insertions were , for different numbers of states per phone . Also , eh , eh , sometimes if you run behind on some of these things , maybe we can get someone else to do it and you can supervise or something . phd f: I probably will have time to do that and time to play a little bit with the silence model . Cuz , the the other That , in fact , might have been part of what , the difference was at least part of it that that we were seeing . professor e: Part of it might just be that the SRI system , they they they always adjust these things to be sort of optimized , phd f: Is there ? professor e: and phd f: I wonder if there 's anything that we could do to the front - end that would affect the insertion professor e: Yes . phd f: What could you do ? professor e: Well , part of what 's going on , is the , the range of values . So , if you have something that has a much smaller range or a much larger range , and taking the appropriate root . professor e: You know ? If something is kind of like the equivalent of a bunch of probabilities multiplied together , you can take a root of some sort . If it 's like seven probabilities together , you can take the seventh root of it or something , or if it 's in the log domain , divide it by seven . professor e: But but , that has a similar effect because it changes the scale of the numbers of the differences between different candidates from the acoustic model phd f: Oh , right .  , it 's more directly like the the language scaling or the ,  the model scaling or acoustic scaling , phd f: That 's interesting . professor e: but you know that those things have kind of a similar effect to the insertion penalty phd f:   professor e: So ,  phd f: So if we know what the insertion penalty is , then we can get an idea about what range our number should be in , professor e: I think so . So that 's why I think that 's another reason other than curiosity as to why i it would in fact be kinda neat to find out if we 're way off . professor e: I 'm sure you 've already looked at this bu in these noisy cases , are ? We are seeing lots of insertions . professor e: I know the VAD takes pre care of part of that , phd f: Yeah . I don't I don't know about the Aurora front - end , but phd b: I think it 's much more balanced with ,  when the front - end is more robust . Wha - what 's a typical number ? phd b: I don't I don't know . professor e: but it it it wouldn't surprise me if there 's still phd b:   professor e: in in the the the old systems we used to do , I I  , I remember numbers kind of like insertions being half the number of deletions , as being and both numbers being tend to be on the small side comparing to to , substitutions . phd f: Well , this the whole problem with insertions was what I think , we talked about when the guy from OGI came down that one time and and that was when people were saying , well we should have a , voice activity detector professor e: Right . phd f: that , because all that stuff that we 're getting thr the silence that 's getting through is causing insertions .  , the fact that some get by may be less of a critical thing if you , get things in the right range . If you 're operating in the wrong range  , that 's why just in general , if you change what these these penalties and scaling factors are , you reach some point that 's a that 's a minimum . We do have to do well over a range of different conditions , some of which are noisier than others . But , I think we may get a better handle on that if we if we see  ,  we ca it 's if we actually could pick a a a more stable value for the range of these features , it , could  Even though it 's it 's it 's true that in a real situation you can in fact adjust the these these scaling factors in the back - end , and it 's ar artificial here that we 're not adjusting those , you certainly don't wanna be adjusting those all the time . And if you have a nice front - end that 's in roughly the right range phd f:  . professor e: I remember after we got our stuff more or less together in the previous systems we built , that we tended to set those scaling factors at kind of a standard level , and we would rarely adjust them again , even though you could get a phd f:   professor e: for an evaluation you can get an extra point or something if you tweaked it a little bit . But , once we knew what rou roughly the right operating range was , it was pretty stable , and  , we might just not even be in the right operating range . phd f: So , would the ?  , would a good idea be to try to map it into the same range that you get in the well - matched case ? So , if we computed what the range was in well - matched , and then when we get our noisy conditions out we try to make it have the same range as ? professor e: No . I I I What what I 'm saying phd f: Oh , I wasn't suggesting change it for different conditions . I was just saying that when we pick a range , we we wanna pick a range that we map our numbers into professor e: Yeah . phd f: we should probably pick it based on the range that we get in the well - matched case . It depends how much we wanna do gamesmanship and how much we wanna do  , i if he it to me , actually , even if you wanna be play on the gamesmanship side , it can be kinda tricky . So , what you would do is set the set the scaling factors , so that you got the best number for this point four five times the you know , and so on . You know ? As for these other things , it may turn out that , it 's kind of reasonable . But then  , Andreas gave a very reasonable response , and he 's probably not gonna be the only one who 's gonna say this in the future of , you know , people people within this tight - knit community who are doing this evaluation are accepting , more or less , that these are the rules . But , people outside of it who look in at the broader picture are certainly gonna say " Well , wait a minute . You 're doing all this standing on your head , on the front - end , phd f: Yeah . professor e: when all you could do is just adjust this in the back - end with one s one knob . professor e: And so we have to at least , I think , determine that that 's not true , which would be OK , or determine that it is true , in which case we want to adjust that and then continue with with what we 're doing . And as you say as you point out finding ways to then compensate for that in the front - end also then becomes a priority for this particular test , phd f: Right . professor e: what 's old with you that 's developed ? phd b: I 'm sorry ? professor e: You OK . What 's old with you that has developed over the last week or two ? phd b: Mmm . phd f: Mainly working on what ? phd b: On the report of the work that was already done . phd f: How about that ? Any - anything new on the thing that , you were working on with the ,  ? phd c: I don't have results yet . professor e: What was that ? phd f: The the , grad a: Voicing thing . professor e: what what 's what 's going on now ? What are you doing ? phd c: to try to found , nnn , robust feature for detect between voice and unvoice . And we w we try to use the variance of the es difference between the FFT spectrum and mel filter bank spectrum . But we don't have res we don't have result of the AURO for Aurora yet . phd c: and professor e: So you 're training neural networks now ? phd c: No , not yet . professor e: So , what wha wh wha what what 's going on ? phd c: Well , we work in the report , too , because we have a lot of result , professor e:  - huh . phd c: they are very dispersed , and was necessary to to look in all the directory to to to give some more structure . I if I can summarize , basically what 's going on is that you 're going over a lot of material that you have generated in furious fashion , f generating many results and doing many experiments and trying to pull it together into some coherent form to be able to see wha see what happens . And phd f: Is this a report that 's for Aurora ? Or is it just like a tech report for ICSI , phd c: No . But that you put it all together so that it 's you 've got you 've got a clearer structure to it . You know what things are , you have things documented , you 've looked things up that you needed to look up . professor e: So so , I I think it 's good to pause , and to gather everything together and make sure it 's in good shape , so that other people can get access to it and so that it can go into a report in June . But I think to to really work on on fine - tuning the report n at this point is is probably bad timing , I I think . Well , we didn't we just planned to work on it one week on this report , not no more , anyway . But phd f: Are you discovering anything , that makes you scratch your head as you write this report , like why did we do that , or why didn't we do this , phd b:  . We just noticed that , wh while gathering the result that for some conditions we didn't have everything . It 's difficult to say what it will give , because when we look at the Aurora the TI - digits experiments , they have these three conditions that have different noises , and apparently this system perform as well on the seen noises on the unseen noises and on the seen noises . phd f: Could you say it again ? What what exactly did they do ? phd b: They used some parts of the , Italian database to train the voice activity detector , I think . The rules as I understand it , is that in principle the Italian and the Spanish and the English no , Italian and the Finnish and the English ? were development data phd b: Yeah .  professor e: So  , and it is true that the performance , on the German was  , even though the improvement wasn't so good , the pre the raw performance was really pretty good . professor e: So And , it it doesn't appear that there 's strong evidence that even though things were somewhat tuned on those three or four languages , that that going to a different language really hurt you . professor e: You 'd really like to have something that needed no particular noise at all , maybe just some white noise or something like that a at most . professor e: That 's something I 'd like to understand before we actually use something from it , phd f: I think it 's professor e: because it would phd f: it 's probably something that , mmm , the you know , the , experiment designers didn't really think about , because I think most people aren't doing trained systems , or , you know , systems that are like ours , where you actually use the data to build models . professor e: except that , that 's what we used in Aurora one , and then they designed the things for Aurora - two knowing that we were doing that . phd f: And they didn't forbid us right ? to build models on the data ? professor e: No . But , I think I think that it it it probably would be the case that if , say , we trained on Italian , data and then , we tested on Danish data and it did terribly , that that it would look bad . You know , maybe there 's parameters that other people have used you know , th that they have tuned in some way for other things . So it 's it 's ,  We should we should Maybe that 's maybe a topic Especially if you talk with him when I 'm not here , that 's a topic you should discuss with Hynek phd b:   phd f: Do we know anything about the speakers for each of the , training utterances ? phd b: What do you mean ? We we phd f: Do you have speaker information ? professor e: Social security number phd f: That would be good . professor e: What kind of information do you mean ? phd f: Well , I was thinking about things like , you know , gender ,  you know , gender - specific nets and , vocal tract length normalization . I d I don't I didn't know what information we have about the speakers that we could try to take advantage of .  , again , i if you had the whole system you were optimizing , that would be easy to see . But if you 're supposedly just using a fixed back - end and you 're just coming up with a feature vector , w w I 'm not sure  , having the two nets Suppose you detected that it was male , it was female you come up with different phd f: Well , you could put them both in as separate streams or something . phd b: Do you have something simple in mind for  , vocal tract length normalization ? phd f:  no . And so I I  , you could maybe use the ideas a similar idea to what they do in vocal tract length normalization . You know , you have some sort of a , general speech model , you know , maybe just a mixture of Gaussians that you evaluate every utterance against , and then you see where each , you know , utterance like , the likelihood of each utterance . You divide the the range of the likelihoods up into discrete bins and then each bin 's got some knob  , setting .  , that  really doesn't sound like a real - time thing with less than two hundred milliseconds , latency that and where you 're not adjusting the statistical engine at all . You know , you can only Right ? phd f: Oh , professor e: Each frame comes in and it 's gotta go out the other end . professor e: But as far as ,  Like I thought BBN did a thing with , vocal tract normalization a ways back . With with , l trying to identify third formant average third formant using that as an indicator of phd f: I don't know . You know , third formant I if you imagine that to first order what happens with , changing vocal tract is that , the formants get moved out by some proportion phd f:   professor e: So , if you had a first formant that was one hundred hertz before , if the fifty if the vocal tract is fifty percent shorter , then it would be out at seven fifty hertz , and so on . Whereas the third formant which might have started off at twenty - five hundred hertz , you know , might be out to thirty - seven fifty , you know so it 's at So , although , you frequently get less distinct higher formants , it 's still third formant 's kind of a reasonable compromise , and phd f:   professor e: So , I think , eh , if I recall correctly , they did something like that . professor e: You know ? That 's more like looking at third formant over over a turn or something like that , phd b:   But on the other hand , male female is a is a is a much simpler categorization than figuring out a a factor to , squish or expand the the spectrum . Y you could imagine that  , just like we 're saying voiced - unvoiced is good to know  , male female is good to know also . professor e: But , you 'd have to figure out a way to to to , incorporate it on the fly .  , I guess , as you say , one thing you could do is simply , have the the male and female output vectors you know , tr nets trained only on males and n trained only on females or or , you know . I don't know if that would really help , because you already have males and females and it 's  -  putting into one net . So is it ? phd f: Is it balanced , in terms of gender the data ? phd b: Mmm . There is something perhaps , I could spend some days to look at this thing , cuz it seems that when we train networks on let 's say , on TIMIT with MSG features , they they look as good as networks trained on PLP . But , when they are used on on the SpeechDat - Car data , it 's not the case oh , well . The MSG features are much worse , and so maybe they 're , less more sensitive to different recording conditions , or Shou professor e: Shouldn't be . What what 's the ,  ? Do you kno recall if the insertions were were higher with MSG ? phd b: I don't know . professor e: so ,  MSG is very , very dif Eh , PLP is very much like mel cepstrum . professor e: So , if it 's very different , then this is the sort of thing  I 'm really glad Andreas brought this point up . And even though we 're not allowed to do that , again we maybe could reflect that back to our use of the features . professor e: So if it if in fact ,  The problem might be that the range of the MSG features is quite different than the range of the PLP or mel cepstrum . But , it 's d it 's after Well , it 's tandem features , so Mmm . We we have estimation of post posteriors with PLP and with MSG as input , professor e: Yeah . professor e: But i it it it it doesn't necessarily You know , they could be ,  Do - doesn't tell you what the variance of the things is . professor e: Right ? Cuz if you 're taking the log of these things , it could be ,  Knowing what the sum of the probabilities are , doesn't tell you what the sum of the logs are . So we should look at the likelihood , or or what ? Or well , at the log , perhaps , and professor e: Yeah . professor e: Or what you know , what you 're  the thing you 're actually looking at . But professor e: What do they look like ? phd f: No And so th the ,  for the tandem system , the values that come out of the net don't go through the sigmoid . Whatever they are at that point , are they something for which taking a square root or cube root or fourth root or something like that is is gonna be a good or a bad thing ? So . professor e: and that 's something that nothing nothing else after that is gonna  , things are gonna scale it  , you know , subtract things from it , scale it from it , but nothing will have that same effect . Cuz if if the log probs that are coming out of the MSG are really big , the standard insertion penalty is gonna have very little effect professor e: Well , the Right . It 's something that , and then it 's going through this transformation that 's probably pretty close to It 's , eh , whatever the KLT is doing . professor e: But still it 's it 's not gonna probably radically change the scale of things . It may be entirely off and and it may be at the very least it may be quite different for MSG than it is for mel cepstrum or PLP . So that would be So the first thing I 'd look at without adjusting anything would just be to go back to the experiment and look at the , substitutions , insertions , and deletions . And if the if the ,  i if there 's a fairly large effect of the difference , say , the r ratio between insertions and deletions for the two cases then that would be , an indicator that it might might be in that direction . But , professor e: Anything else ? phd b: my my point was more that it it works sometimes and but sometimes it doesn't work . phd b: And it works on TI - digits and on SpeechDat - Car it doesn't work , and professor e: Yeah . professor e: and And , sometimes , you know , there 's enough evidence for something to work and then it 's harder , it breaks . professor e: so it 's But it but , i it it could be that when you say it works maybe we could be doing much better , even in TI - digits . Well , there is also the spectral subtraction , which ,  I think maybe we should , try to integrate it in in our system . phd b: But , professor e: O phd b: I think that would involve to to mmm use a big a al already a big bunch of the system of Ericsson . Because he has spectral subtraction , then it 's followed by , other kind of processing that 's are dependent on the  , if it 's speech or noi or silence . phd b: And there is this kind of spectral flattening after if it 's silence , and and s I I think it 's important , to reduce this musical noise and this this increase of variance during silence portions . This was in this would involve to take almost everything from from the this proposal and and then just add some kind of on - line normalization in in the neural network . Well , I took a lot of time just getting my taxes out of the way multi - national taxes . So , I 'm I 'm starting to write code now for my work but I don't have any results yet .  , i it would be good for me to talk to Hynek , I think , when he 's here . grad d: Do you know what his schedule will be like ? professor e: he 'll be around for three days . I 'll ,  You know , he 's he 'll he 'll be talking with everybody in this room So . phd f: But you said you won't you won't be here next Thursday ? professor e: Not Thursday and Friday . That 's just that 's that 's one of the big advantages of not making much money is the taxes are easier . professor e: Have to do So you you have to do two returns ? grad d: Mmm . For tw That 's right , ju phd f: But not for this next year ? professor e: Two thousand . grad d: I 'll I 'll still have a bit of Canadian income but it 'll be less complicated because I will not be a considered a resident of Canada anymore , so I won't have to declare my American income on my Canadian return . I just , continuing looking at , ph  , phonetic events , and , this Tuesday gonna be , meeting with John Ohala with Chuck to talk some more about these , ph  , phonetic events . No  , why don't you say something about what it is ? grad a: Oh , you oh , you want you want details . I thought we 'd , you know grad a: I was hoping I could wave my hands . So , once wa I I was thinking getting getting us a set of acoustic events to  , to be able to distinguish between , phones and words and stuff . And  , once we we would figure out a set of these events that can be , you know , hand - labeled or or derived , from h the hand - labeled phone targets .  , we could take these events and , do some cheating experiments , where we feed , these events into an SRI system , eh , and evaluate its performance on a Switchboard task . grad d: Hey , Barry ? Can you give an example of an event ? grad a: Yeah . professor e: Whose paper is it ? grad a: this is a paper by Hubener and Cardson Benson Bernds - Berndsen . phd f: There 's ,  in my mind , anyways , there 's a difference between , acoustic features and acoustic events . And I think of acoustic features as being , things that linguists talk about , like ,  professor e: So , stuff that 's not based on data . Versus an acoustic event , which is just some something in the acoustic signal that is fairly easy to measure . professor e: when we did the SPAM work  , there we had we had this notion of an , auditory @ @ auditory event .  , there 's certainly a bunch of a bunch of places where you know that neurons are gonna fire because something novel has happened . But there 's certainly other things beyond what we talked about there that aren't just sort of rapid changes , but phd f: It 's kinda like the difference between top - down and bottom - up . You know , you look at the phone and you say this phone is supposed to be you know , have this feature , this feature , and this feature . phd f: What ? And then that you know , that may map to this phone sometimes , and sometimes it may not . And ,  and then from that point on , I would , s design robust event detectors , in a similar , wa spirit that Saul has done w  , with his graphical models , and this this probabilistic AND - OR model that he uses .  , eh , try to extend it to ,  to account for other other phenomena like , CMR co - modulation release . And ,  and maybe also investigate ways to to modify the structure of these models , in a data - driven way , similar to the way that , Jeff Jeff , Bilmes did his work .  , and while I 'm I 'm doing these , event detectors , you know , I can ma mea measure my progress by comparing , the error rates in clean and noisy conditions to something like , neural nets .  , and So so , once we have these these , event detectors , we could put them together and and feed the outputs of the event detectors into into the SRI ,   system , and ,  and test it on on Switchboard or , maybe even Aurora stuff . professor e: By the way , there 's , a couple people who are gonna be here I forget if I already told you this , but , a couple people who are gonna be here for six months . professor e: there 's a Professor Kollmeier , from Germany who 's , quite big in the , hearing - aid signal - processing area and , Michael Kleinschmidt , who 's worked with him , who also looks at auditory properties inspired by various , brain function things . professor e: So , I think they 'll be interesting to talk to , in this sort of issue as these detectors are are , developing . professor e: So , he looks at interesting interesting things in in the different ways of looking at spectra in order to to get various speech properties out . And like I say , I I encourage you to go ahead and meet , next week with , Hynek
I have received apologies for absence from Jack Sargeant, and I'm very pleased to welcome Vikki Howells, who is substituting for Jack this morning. Item 2 this morning is our last evidence session on the Children (Abolition of Defence of Reasonable Punishment) (Wales) Bill, and I'm really pleased to welcome back Julie Morgan AM, Deputy Minister for Health and Social Services; Karen Cornish, who is deputy director of the children and families division; and Emma Gammon, who is the lawyer working on the Bill. If you're happy, we'll go straight into questions because we've got lots of ground that we want to cover, and the first questions are from Janet Finch-Saunders. Of those individuals who responded to our written consultation in a personal capacity, nearly 70 per cent do not support this Bill. We also heard a clear message from the parents we met last week who oppose this Bill that, as parents, they understand clearly the difference between child abuse and a light smack from a loving parent. How would you like to respond to that? julie morgan am: Thank you very much, Janet, for that question. I think I'd like to start by saying that child abuse is not the issue that the Bill is trying to address. What the Bill is trying to do is prohibit all forms of physical punishment, and that is in order to protect children's rights and to ensure that children have the same protection from physical punishment as adults. But I do understand that people have different views, and that's why this process has been so importantfor us to hear what your views are and what parents' views are. I know that, often, people use different euphemisms really to make light of physical punishment. I've heard expressions used such as a 'light smack' or a 'loving smack' or a 'tap', and really there can be different interpretations of what is a 'light smack', what is a 'loving smack', and that doesn't really cover the issue of the frequency of such actions being taken. But I would say that, however mild it seems to be, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child recognises that any physical punishment of children, however minor, is incompatible with their human rights, and why should a big person hit a little person? That's been the sort of mantra, really, that has taken me through supporting this legislationthat it just seems wrong to me that there is something in the law that could mean that there could be an excuse for that happening. I believe we shouldn't have anything in the law that defends the physical punishment of children, and I don't think we should be defining acceptable ways of hitting or punishing children, because I think it does send a confused message to children. It says, 'It's okay for me to hit you, but don't you hit anybody else.' I think it causes confusion. So, I'm confident that updating the law will make it much clearer for parents and people working with childrenand, of course, I'm sure, as you'll have heard from the evidence you've taken, that people who work with children are overwhelmingly in support of this legislation, and the representative surveys that we've carried out show support for the Bill's principles. Last week, during the workshop, a few parentspredominantly all of them, actuallysaid that they use a gentle tap or smacking as part of a toolkit of ways to deal with challenging behaviour or, sometimes, for the safety of the child or, indeed, to carry out the parenting of a child. How do you intend to work with parents going forward, given the finite resources that social care and social services have? I know from the responses we've received to the consultation that parents themselves who have to parent 24 hours a day, seven days a week, they are really, on the scale of things, very upset about this. How do you intend to try and get your message across to those parents on removing what they consider to be part of their toolkit when raising children? How do you intend to deal with that aspect? julie morgan am: Well, first of all, I want to say, as I've said in most evidence sessions, that I completely accept that bringing up children is hard. It's very difficult; many of us have done it and we know how tough it can be. There's a whole range of other ways that you can help parents bring up children, and advice you can give them of different methods to use. But, the clear message of this Bill is that we don't want any physical punishment; we don't think it's the right thing to do, and we believe that we are supported by many people in that view. Several consultation responses refer to statistics from Sweden, which they say show that child-on-child violence actually increased by 1,791 per cent between 1984 and 2010, following the ban on physical punishment in 1979. What is your view on these figures and how can we be certain that this Bill won't lead to other long-term negative outcomes in Wales? julie morgan am: Well, I'm aware of the debate surrounding the interpretation of the different statistics from Sweden. What's happened, really, in the academic research is that different academics are focused on different figures to support their views, and the methodological ways of doing it makes it quite difficult to have causation. I was very encouraged that a recent study of 88 countries concluded that if a country prohibits corporal punishment, the result is association with less youth violence, and this is one of the largest cross-national analyses of youth violence, with more than 400,000 participants. So, there is other evidence, very widespread evidence, which looks at a whole range of people, that is in contrast to the Swedish evidence. But, evidence in this field is mixed and we have considered a wide range of research and reviews, but ultimately the decision is one that is based on our commitment to children's rights. lynne neagle am: Do you want question 3? janet finch-saunders am: I can do it, yes. The Bill's explanatory memorandum says that 'there is no definitive evidence that "reasonable" physical punishment causes negative outcomes for children'. However, we have heard from Equal Protection Network Cymru that international evidence could not be clearer and that they found the Wales Centre for Public Policy's report, on which the explanatory memorandum is based, very confusing and very frustrating, and that it didn't tie in with what they knew. How would you respond to those viewpoints? julie morgan am: We were very keen to get as balanced research as we possibly could, and we didn't want to just put forward views that we thought agreed with our point of view. So, we were trying to give a balanced point of view, but we did commission the Wales Centre for Public Policy to do an independent literature review and we're honestly reporting to you what they said. But they did make it clear, again, which I think I've said in previous evidence sessions, that all physical punishment, under all conditions, is potentially harmful to children. And certainly, there is no peer-reviewed research that says that physically punishing a child is going to improve things, has favourable outcomes. So, I understand what Equal Protection Network Cymru are saying, because there is a lot of very strong evidence, but we're giving you the evidence that we had from the research that we commissioned. I've just got a couple of questions on this balance between the steps that will be needed to implement this Bill and the impact that it'll actually have. You've probably heard in evidence that we've received that there are still some concerns out there about how agencies might address malicious reporting; some detail about how the public interest test might be applied further along the line; what's going to happen with out-of-hours provision from social services, and so on. There are still, from our perspective, quite a few things that are unknown about the effect on our public services in particular of the implementation of this Bill. Would you agree that perhaps we should know a little bit more about that before we proceed with supporting the Bill? julie morgan am: Well, it's very difficult, bringing in this legislation that hasn't been done before. It's very difficult to gauge the impact, and we've covered that, I know, in previous discussions. And I think it's an interesting point to make that, in Ireland, they introduced similar legislation through an amendment to a Bill, and had no detailed preparation for bringing in the Bill, and in fact there's no evidence that this has caused any difficulties, and no significant negative impacts or increase in workload. But in any case, we have our implementation group, which is going to address many of these issues. You see, I think we do have to take a balance between assuming this Bill is going to go through and what we can actually do. We can't presume that the Assembly will accept this Bill, so we have to be staged in what we do. But we had the first strategic implementation group on 14 May, and we had representatives from the police, the police and crime commissioners, the Crown Prosecution Service, the Association of Directors of Social Services Cymru, the Association of Directors of Education in Wales, the Welsh Local Government Association, the legal profession and the third sector. They're all there, and they're all very keen to make this legislation work and to look at the implications of it. I'd just like to say how grateful I am for all those organisations giving their time and commitment. They've set up four work streams, looking at parenting advice and support; data collection, evaluation and monitoring; operations, procedures and processes; and out-of-court disposals and diversions. These groups will be taking forward this work and will be looking at many of those issues that you've mentioned, and will also be updated on the progress of the awareness strategy that we will be bringing in. I'm really confident that the legislation will be implemented in a very practical and workable way, because we do have the commitment of all these agencies, and there's been a huge amount of preparation done in the Welsh Government to prepare for this in a way that, I have to say, hasn't been done in some of the other countriesas I mentioned, in Ireland. So, as much preparation as could be done is being done and has been done, but we really now see that the implementation group is taking forward all these issues, and obviously those agencies that are taking part in the implementation group are, on the whole, in support of the principles of this Bill. suzy davies am: Well, thank you for that, Minister, but the way I look at this is that you've already said that, if this Bill passesand it will pass; it's in enough manifestos to pass, so the question is what type of Bill is going to passand if there is a gap of, let's say, two years before anything is implemented, and the implementation group is doing the work that you've describedand we're very relieved to hear thatwhy is this Bill being introduced now when that implementation group hasn't really come up with a strategy that could help persuade people about what implementing this Bill would look like in real life? You're asking the Welsh public to take a bit of a chance on this. julie morgan am: I think we have, as far as possible, looked at international evidence where this legislation has been introduced. It's different for different countries, so I know it's difficult to get anything that's absolutely linked. As the team who have been working on this have worked through the preparation for the Bill, lots of issues have arisen as they've done that, and so you have to do that, I think, alongside the actual practical implications with the groups that are coming together, and I think the point at which we've done that is probably just about right, really. I hope this isn't going on to somebody else's questions, but accepting what you say, would you then be open to accepting amendments to the face of the Bill that would clarify the position for the Welsh public on certain things that may be of concern to them, which have been fed through to us? I'm not suggesting anything specific, but. We want to keep it as simple as possible, but I'm certainly prepared to consider any issues that come up, and I think that's been the case all along. It's just what's going to work as a bit of law here, isn't it? And then just finally from me, and you've made the point to a degree, that, of course, not all countries are like Wales. If we look at Ireland, and New Zealand's the one we've been looking at an awful lot, which are the most similar, their work hasn't really been in place for that long, and one of the things that, I think, you're going to need to be able persuade us of is that if the culture change to which we've already referred is going in one way anyway, and if it continues to go in that direction, that this Bill will have had a causal effect. I'm trying to establish whether the culture change is going to happen anyway, whether or not we pass this legislation. julie morgan am: Well, it does look as if a culture change is happening in any case, but the culture change will never really move, I think, as most of us want it, if there is legislation that does appear to condone the use of physical punishment, and having this reasonable punishment in law means that happens. So, I think, passing the legislation by itself will certainly not do everything suzy davies am: No. And I think the research has all shown you've got to have an awareness campaign running along with it. And in the other countries we've looked at, I don't think an awareness campaign was actually carried out because we are planning a really big awareness campaign because we think it's absolutely fair to the Welsh public, as you said, that they absolutely know what we're doing and everybody's aware of it. Well, can I just finish? julie morgan am: I know the point you're making. julie morgan am: But if you've got a bit of legislation there on the Bill, it will always mean that for a very minority group of parents, they will feel that they have got the right to use physical punishment against their child, and I just think it's something we should get rid of. And, of course, the other point that I don't think we say enough about is that it's not just parents; it's people in loco parentis who are working in leisure centres or religious establishments or any of those unregulated settings who also have this defence. So, it's last bit in the jigsaw, really, to have it quite clear that we want to treat our children with respect and dignity and I think this will move us towards that. I think what I was trying to get to is: how are we going to prove that this piece of legislation has worked effectively? It's about the data capture, I guess. suzy davies am: What are you going to do to make sure that you acquire evidence in the future to show that this has worked, or potentially not worked? I'd be surprised if that was the case, but. Because, of course, that has an implication then on the resources for the various people you'll be asking to collect the data. I think that's very important because we need to know what is the effect of the legislation we'll be bringing in. We have got ongoing monitoring and we've got ongoing monitoring surveys looking at what are the views of the public. So, yes suzy davies am: It'll be directly linked to the Bill, then, rather than that broad culture change. julie morgan am: The monitoring, asking the views of the public, is generally about issues related to the Bill. The views of parents about whether this legislation suzy davies am: Sorry, I don't want to labour this point. suzy davies am: Basically, we need a question, 'Has this Bill stopped you smacking your child?' That's the core question. Well, we are in the surveys asking how many people feel that they do smack their child, but this is any physical punishment, actually, not just smacking suzy davies am: And it's for the future, not for now. We're going to move on to explore some of the issues around social services now with questions from Dawn Bowden. Morning, Minister.When the Association of Directors of Social Services Cymru came in,they were saying to us that they would encourage people to report any instances, anything that they see around somebody smacking a child. That leads on to the question about whether in fact social services, then, would change their thresholds for intervention if there were more cases being referred to them. Are you fairly confident, are you certain, that that wouldn't happen, or do you think there is a danger that social services might actually say, 'Well, actually, if we're getting all these referrals, we need to think again about when and if we intervene', and the thresholds could become a bit lower? julie morgan am: Well, as you know, social services already receive and investigate reports of children being physically punishedany sort of range of physical punishmentand they use standard procedures to determine how to proceed, but that's done on a case-by-case basis; it's made on the individual case element. And if this legislation is enacted, a significant proportion of the incidents of physical punishment will not require any response under the child protection procedures, and we do not expect the threshold of significant harm to change. And I know you took evidence from the ADSS, and I know Sally Jenkins gave evidence, who is one of the lead practitioners, and I understood she said: 'In terms of thresholds for children's services, we would not be anticipating a huge number of referrals to us. We recognise that's likely to happen.' So, I think dawn bowden am: So, it's the threshold for intervention that's the key, really, isn't it, rather than? julie morgan am: Yes, they don't see that changing. The police, when they came in to give evidence, talked about the need for the multi-agency safeguarding hubs. Do you think the implementation of the Bill, and its effectiveness, is going to be dependent on us having consistently effective multi-agency safeguarding hubs right the way across the country? julie morgan am: No. The effective implementation of the Bill does not depend on MASHs, as we call them for short, because bodies, social services, already work closely with the police on a day-to-day basis, really, and they have indicated their willingness to do so, and there are already well-established mechanisms in place that enable this joint working to take place. I know that the MASHs are only in certain areas, and I know that it's. I think they're probably very good to have, actually, and very good to help the work, but it's certainly not dependent on them. dawn bowden am: Okay, but it would be something that you would be wanting to see developed, that eventually we would have these MASHs right across the country? julie morgan am: At the moment, there are three MASHs in the south Wales police force, and one pilot MASH in the Gwent police force, but they don't operate in exactly the same way. And I know that other areas have considered having MASHs, but haven't actually brought any in. And a multi-agency strategic group, which is led by South Wales Police, has been set up, and it will consider the effectiveness of MASH arrangements in Wales, so it's very possible there will be more MASHs, but I want to reiterate that we're not dependent on MASHs in order to have the close working. dawn bowden am: Yes, because the key point from the police's point of view, I think, was that they provide a single point of contact, so it's very simple, isn't it? It's a single point of contact, and I think they were quite concerned that having that single point of contact might actually reduce the level of unnecessary police prosecutionswell, the police don't prosecute, but charges and so on. julie morgan am: I think they are very effective and very much to be welcomed, but it's certainly not essential. karen cornish: I was just going to say that it's probably worth saying that looking at how agencies work together will be one of the things, again, that will be looked at very carefully on the task and finish group, looking at processes and procedures. We're very alert to the fact that there are different organisations, different services, and that bringing them together, working in as consistent a way as possible, is really, really important. As the Minister has said, social services, the police and others are already committed to working together, and, actually, we just want to make sure that we develop those working practices in the best way possible, recognising that not every area will have a MASH, and reiterating, again, what the Deputy Minister has saidthat the effectiveness of the Bill is not predicated on a MASH in every area, but it is important that all those organisations do work together in a consistent and appropriate way. And they've talked about the fact that the social worker's workload is already very stretched, and you'll be aware of that, Minister. And I think they were getting a little bit concerned about whether a whole raft of new cases are going to land on what is an already extremely heavy workload, and how effectively they could deal with that. Would you say that those concerns, in terms of the impact of this Bill, are unfounded, or are we just saying that this is an unknown quantity at this stage, and we're going to have to wait and see? julie morgan am: Well, first of all, if I can just pay tribute to the work that social workers do. julie morgan am: Because, obviously, theyre going to be essential to the successful implementation of this Bill. [Laughter.] But they do do a hard job, which isnt always recognised, I think, by the public. So, I do take this point very seriously, but, obviously, the professionals who have given evidencemany of them have said they dont see there being a big rise of referrals. Jane Randall, National Independent Safeguarding BoardI think she came to yousaid: 'there's no expectation that there's going to be a huge increase in the number of referralsI think it would be dealt with within their existing resources.' , there may be an increase in reporting of incidents, initially, maybe from individuals in the community and organisations such as schools. And I think it could have an impact on the initial stages of social services activity, which I think othersI think Sally Jenkins said that maybe thered be an increase, a small increase, at the beginning. But as we expect the awareness raising and the ongoing support that well be giving to parentswe do feel that the incidents of physical punishment will be falling over time. But I know that social workers are stretched, and are hard-pressedand I think that was some of the evidence given to you by the British Association of Social Workers. But I think its important to remember that they are also very strongly in support of us carrying out this legislation. So, were going to work very closely with social servicesobviously, key members of our implementation groupand we will collect relevant data for a period before the actual implementation, in order to get a baseline. We want a baseline, and we are working with a small number of social services to try to get the baseline of where it is, and to see what happens when the Bill is implemented. So, I dont think, really, we have to fear that social services would be overwhelmed, but we must be prepared, and we must get this data and monitor it closely. And social services clearly having to make judgments every daythey will be making those judgments quite quickly and turning them around. dawn bowden am: The Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service, when they spoke to us, also hadthere was a similar kind of concern raised. But do you think there is any danger at all that it could divert CAFCASS staff, if we have a high volume of reporting, particularly given that weve got a 26-week limit in which to deal with those cases? Is that something that causes you any concern at this stage? julie morgan am: Well, CAFCASS are confident that they can deal with the cases that they have.As you know, there's been a big increase in the numbers that CAFCASS is dealing with already, and they have managed to very successfully cope with the demand. dawn bowden am: Because they were basically just saying that it's unpredictable at this stage, weren't they, so? julie morgan am: Yes. dawn bowden am: Yes, because they were talking about the fact that no assessment had been made about the risk of malicious reporting. So, I think their biggest concern was more about the rise in looked-after children and the impact on that in terms of their workload, and it was just a question of whether this would potentially divert any resources, I guess. julie morgan am: I think, in terms of the malicious reporting, obviously that is something that happens a lot now and it is is likely that, perhaps. I think they felt that, in existing cases, this might be another element that should be brought in, but they seemed, in my discussions, fairly confident. But, obviously, another area we are very concerned about is the rise in the number of looked-after children, and that's somewhere we want to try to do what we can to bring that down. Just before Suzy comes in with a supplementaryCAFCASS didn't come to the committee, they've submitted julie morgan am: They sent a letterthat's right. suzy davies am: Just very quickly, because I don't want to spend a lot of time on this: isn't it going to be true that any increase in workload for social services or schools or whoever is going to depend on reporting rising? Where do you see the likely rise in reporting taking place? Will it be members of the public or is it going to be professionals who feel that this is something that they can't ignore from now on? julie morgan am: well, I think it would be mixed. I don't have any view or where it particularly would come from, because if there are any reports that go into agencies now about children being physically punished in any wayI think they investigate those already now. They would be made much more aware, we hope, by the legislationso, that may happen. But I think, in schools, if there is physical punishment reported by a child, the schools would report it in any case. suzy davies am: I was just curious about where you thought the main source would be julie morgan am: I can't really be definitive about that. sian gwenllian am: The Bill, in essence, is a simple one, of course, is it not? But what it does is provide a useful discussion on what good parenting is and what discipline methods are the most effectivethat is, discipline methods that parents can use rather than physical punishment. Do you think, therefore, that there's a need to invest much more in programmes to do with parenting and in support services for families in terms of parenting, and that as part of an early intervention strategy that's more co-ordinated and robust than whatwe have at present? julie morgan am: Well, we are developing the Bill as part of a much wider package of support for children and their parents, which, of course, is already in place. Give it time' campaign, which aims to help parents do the best job that they can by providing positive tips on parenting and information. And we're already preparing now to update that, because, of course, that only goes up to age 7 and deals with issues about how you cope with your kids if they're difficult at meal times and if they have tantrums. But, of course, this legislation will go up to 18 years old, and so the issues may be very different. And then, obviously, there's the universal services that give access to help and to promote positive parenting, delivered by local government, health, education, social services, social justice and the third sector. We will be encouraging all those agencies that provide that universal service to help support parents and to pass on this information. Then, there will be the more targeted supports, such as Flying Start and Families First, which offer help and advice. But what I've done is I've asked the officials to carry out a mapping exercise to see where the support is and where the gaps are or opportunities to do more, particularly around information and advice on positive alternatives to physical punishment, but also more widely. It's such a wide range that we need that mapping exercise and we need to see where we need to put in more support. sian gwenllian am: I'm pleased that you're going to conduct that exercise, because the evidence that we've received from a number of different directions is that there isn't enough investment in reality in the support services in the early years, and that there is a real need for the focus within Government go back to early intervention and to have a much more co-ordinated strategy. You've mentioned a number of agencies working on different elements, perhaps, but perhaps there's a need to bring them all together. Give it time' campaign, but I think it's an online campaign effectively, and Flying Startyes, people who attend those courses find them useful, but, of course, it's not available across Wales and it's not available to every parent. There is a scheme that is available through schools in Gwyneddperhaps you are aware of itIncredible Years, with Professor Judy Hutchings, who has been working on this for a number of years now, very successfully, where schools, parents and the children work together on parenting methods that are positive. I wonder if it's time to think about expanding that as part of an early intervention strategy across Wales. Perhaps you can't give a specific answer today, but may I ask you to take a look at that? What concerns me is that the Bill is going through but there's not enough work relating to education and having people's support for different methods, more positive methods, in my opinion, of parenting. There's a real need to move and to invest in that area and perhaps move money towards that work. julie morgan am: Well, certainly, I think that is the purpose of the mapping exercise, to see what is successful, where things need to be expanded, and that's what we're going to consider. I think there are patches all over Wales of really good progress, but, certainly, I'm sure we need to give more support to parents in the early years, and I think they're only too glad to have it as well. Children are very receptive at that age and early intervention is the key to many of the issues that we have to deal with later on. We're going to return to some of the parenting issues later, but in the meantime we've got questions from Hefin David. hefin david am: Just to take it on the next step from what Sin Gwenllian was asking aboutin schools, are teachers ready for this legislation? julie morgan am: On our implementation group, the education sector is represented. Obviously, corporal punishment was banned in schools a long time ago, and I think the education sector is very supportive of this move. But in terms of the awareness for teachers to be ready for itobviously, the awareness campaign has got to be aimed at professionals in every field and certainly aimed at teachers. hefin david am: So, if I was a teacher in an individual school, what kind of preparation do you think I should expect? julie morgan am: You know this better than me, having been more in the education field than me, but I think teachers are updated on different parts of childcare legislation now, and have in-service training days and training courses. hefin david am: One of the things that the National Association of Head Teachers told us was that they wouldn't want the cost of that kind of training to come from core budgets. Would you agree with that? julie morgan am: Well, I would have thought this sort of measure would be incorporated into the training they were using already, actually. hefin david am: So, you think it should come from the core budget that they use for training? julie morgan am: I think it could be incorporated in what they're already doing. And do you think that would be a significant additional cost or do you think that that would be minimal? julie morgan am: I would have thought it would be minimal. They already have training courses about childcare issues, and this would be something that would be absorbed into that. Can you just be a bit clearer about how they are represented again? I'm not sure I caught that. julie morgan am: Do you want to, Karen, because you were at the group? karen cornish: Yes. So, education are represented on it through the Association of Directors of Education in Wales, and they have a representative on the strategic implementation group, and we are working with them to understand who else will be on the task and finish groups that we're setting up that the Minister's already talked about. I personally went and spoke to them earlier in the year when the Bill was being introduced, received their feedback and have said that I will go back and speak with them. The things that are being raised so farwould you say they're reflective of the concerns that the NAHT rose about, for example, funding of training? Are those kinds of issues raised? The practical implications of introducing this Billare they raised? If not, what other issues might be raised? karen cornish: So, I think that the main concerns that you've already heard as a committee are similar concerns to those that have been raised previously. So, there's not anything in addition to the things that we have discussed, either with the trade unions or through the implementation group, or during the consultation period. And, as the Minister said, for the majority of these sort of things, teachers, education and other workforces already have procedures in place, because this comes under a safeguarding issue at one level. The ask will be based around those safeguarding procedures and, therefore, education and other services update their processes and procedures on a regular basis as a matter of course when any issues like this are addressed. Minister, I don't know whether you wanted to say anything about the well-being and the julie morgan am: Yes. One of the things that I think this committee has been involved in is we want to have a whole-school approach. We want mental health and well-being to be part of the way that the whole school operates, and the culture and how schools engage with pupils and parents. And we want to create that atmosphere where there's no wrong door, where children can bring up any of the concerns that they have with any member of the school staff that they trust. And so, I think the creation of that sort of atmosphere is very important in taking forward this issue. I think the Bill, though, introduces a very specific set of changes that julie morgan am: It removes the defence; that's all the Bill does. hefin david am: But should a parent witness, now, smacking, then it will require a different kind of approachsorry, if a teacher were to witness smacking, it would require a different kind of approach, perhaps, to existing approaches. There shouldn't, therefore, be any surprise amongst teachers in how to deal with these things when the Bill comes in. I suppose the question I'm asking is: can we be assured that nothing you've said today in this meeting, in this committee, should be a surprise to teachers and trade unions, because that would already have been communicated through the Bill implementation group? julie morgan am: Yes, well, Karen has already said about the meetings that she's had with the unions and they are present on the implementation group, but a lot of these things happen already. They already have to make decisions about physical punishment they may be told about by children, for exampleprobably more likely than actually witnessing anything. And they already have to make decisions on those sorts of issues, so I see this as being incorporated in with that. With regard to health and the communication of this to parents, we've heard about the Healthy Child Wales programme, and the fact that it has the opportunity to play a role in raising parents' awareness. Do you think that's the case? julie morgan am: I think the Healthy Child Wales programme and the role of the health visitor is absolutely crucial, because, obviously, the health visitor is there right at the beginning. It's a universal service, and so there will be great opportunity for them to promote positive parenting in a much stronger way than they're able to do at the moment, because the fact that you have this defence does mean that the professionals aren't able to make it as clear as they want to make it that positive parenting is the way that they'd like families to go. So, I think this will be a great advantage to health visitors, and, obviously, they support it strongly, because they're trying to encourage parents not to use physical punishment now, but with their hands slightly tied behind their back, because the defence does exist. hefin david am: That's great, that's a good thing, but the concern we've got is that half the parents across Wales are not accessing the Healthy Child Wales programme, and in my community, within the Aneurin Bevan health board area, 80 per cent of parents aren't accessing the Healthy Child Wales programme. So, are there concerns that, if you rely too much on that process for communication, then parents, particularly in the early years, will be left out? julie morgan am: We've got to rely on a range of ways of reaching parents, and I think that there are other times when there is a much higher ratio of children and families seen. But I think we've had that discussion with the mapping exercise that we've already mentioned, that we're going to identify where there are gaps or where we can do more, and that's where we will identify this. karen cornish: I think as well that that figure relates to one contact point across the whole of the Healthy Child Wales programme, not the Healthy Child Wales programme as a whole. That figure lynne neagle am: The percentage relates to the contact at age three and a half, but that is exactly the kind of age when you'd expect more children to. If they were going to be smacked, it would be at that sort of age, wouldn't it, really? So, that is a concern for the committee, really, in terms of coverage. Midwives, health visitors and others working with families would actually be giving those messages, core messages, about setting boundaries, managing behaviour, discipline, positive parenting, right from the very beginning. So, reliance on that single point of contact at that one age point is not necessarily the most appropriate, because I think there's a period from birth through to, actually, later as well, when those key health messages, those key messages around positive parenting, are and can be given. As the Minister said, we will be mapping a lot of this, but we can give you some more advice on that, if that would be helpful, about the types of messages that are given during that period of time. I've got some supplementaries on this, because I think the committee is concerned that at a key opportunity at age three and a half, a big chunk of families aren't having that contact that they should expect with their health visitor, really. It's also a time in their child's life when they're likely to be spending time not with their parents, in school or early years. And I just wanted a bit of clarification from you, Minister, on what you were saying to Hefin David about training here. I got the sense you thought this could just be slipped in as a paragraph in existing guidance, but I'm not clear about what happens to a teacher who is told by a child that they've been smacked, and they decide that they're not going to report thatwill they get into trouble over that? If it's part of a bigger picture that a teacher should have picked up, that's different, but, if a child tells a teacher, 'Oh, Mammy smacked me because I did such and such', is that teacher going to get into trouble if they don't report that to the police? julie morgan am: If that happens now, the teacher is expected to report that now. sian gwenllian am: Yes, I'm just interested to hear a bit more about the mapping exercise that you've referred to, which I think is really important, but it is going to show up a lot of gaps geographically, but also in service provision for different groups of families. It's all very well doing a mapping exercise, but what is the purpose of that, and how are you going to ensure that those gaps don't exist in future? Maybe we could have a note about what the timetable is for this exercise, and more in-depth understanding perhaps about what your intentions are, and how you intend to take it forward once you've done the mapping exercise. We absolutely acknowledge that there is a lot more work to be done, and we know that we have to work hard at this to reach every family. Obviously, the information that we've had about the Healthy Child Wales, the health boards will be monitoring that information and will be. I think they're going to establish a project board to consider the themes that are coming out from the Healthy Child Wales, and so that will be certainly addressed there. sian gwenllian am: And there will be investment needed, obviously, to fill in those gaps, which means a significant shift in the way Government now looks at its budget, and a shift towards that early prevention. julie morgan am: I think we all agree that early prevention is the key for happy, healthy children, and so we'll certainly consider everything that arises. You've said repeatedly that the intention of this Bill isn't to criminalise parents, and I believe that that's not your intention. So, what I'm interested in hearing about is how youor the work that you've done to satisfy yourself that the huge majority of parents that are going to be caught up in the change of this Act won't result in parents getting anywhere near the CPS, for example. Obviously, there are going to be occasions where there are recidivists who keep smacking despite perhaps earlier warnings, or families get identified as doing something far more serious with their children than this, and I'm not talking about thoseI'm talking about the people who are currently protected, if I can put it like that. I'm very interested in hearing what you've got to say about out-of-court disposals and pre being charged activity. I wonder if you can tell us a little bit about the assessment and work that you've done in that area. Well, there are a number of out-of-court disposals that the police can use, because the police want to respond in a positive and proportionate way. The use of out-of-court disposals is actually a non-devolved responsibility, but we'll be working suzy davies am: That's what I wanted to ask you about. julie morgan am: Yes, they are non-devolved, but we will be working with the Home Office, the Ministry of Justice, the CPS, the police and the police and crime commissioners to consider suitable interventions. And one of the main areas of focus of the National Police Chiefs' Council's national strategyis to reduce the current six disposal options to just two. And that's going to be conditional caution and community resolution, and the four Welsh police forces are going to be moving towards this two-tier approach, which they believe will make for greater consistency. So, what we're doing is we are exploring, with the police liaison unit, how we can develop a suitable diversion scheme, with a focus on advice and support on positive alternatives to physical punishment, and how we can tie that into the wider activity. And, obviously, it all depends on the individual circumstances of the case, because the other thing we're going to look at is the individual. But it's possible then we could get a diversion scheme provided through a community resolution order; it could be potentially be given instead of a caution. suzy davies am: Thank you for confirming that, but even that is quite far down the process from the day that a smack is reported, and, as you know, particularly as soon as the police get involved, and even social services, if a record is made of even a complainteven if that complaint goes no further, even if you don't get anywhere near an arrest, shall we say, that is logged in certain parts of the system and will need to be revealed in certain circumstances. I'm thinking of the enhanced Disclosure and Barring Service check in particular, but there are other instances as well. Have you done any impact assessment on that, because that is awe're talking about a situation where there's a massive impact, potentially, on an adult, when there have been no grounds at all to worry that a child's rights have been infringed, for example? It will happen in malicious reporting, but it could happen in reporting where an apparent battery has taken place, but it turns out to have been something completely differentyou know, pushing a child's hand away, that sort of thing. The police are not going to want to take that any further at all, but it's on their records. How are you going to protect parents in those circumstances, within our legislative competence? julie morgan am: Well, the issue of non-conviction data obviously doesn't just apply to this Bill we're bringing in; it applies to everything. So, it's something that you can look at in a general sensethat the police can visit and there's no further action, but that could be for anything suzy davies am: But this is very sensitive, this area. But, obviously, this does have an issue in terms of, particularly, the DBS checks and if you needed an enhanced certificate, if you wanted to be a teacher, a childcare worker, or those sorts of occupations. But, when disclosing information held locally, the police follow the quality assurance framework, and information must pass certain tests, which are related to considerations of relevance, substantiality and proportionality, and considerations of the safety aspects as well of disclosing information. And the police must record their thought process, their rationale, explaining how and why they reached all of their conclusions and their decisions. And this information is then assessed by the chief officer to determine whether it's reasonable to believe that it's relevant, and whether, in their opinion, it ought to be disclosed. So suzy davies am: Is that in all jobs, though, because my understanding is that there are certain professions where that exemption doesnt apply, and theyre likely to be the ones that are really relevant to the removal of the defence? So, Im not talking about, I don't know, people who might work as volunteers; Im literally talking about teachers and doctors, maybe dentists. julie morgan am: Well, we have done some work on this, havent we? Do you want to say about that, Karen? karen cornish: Yes. So, it does apply across all professions, and we have been in discussion with the DBS about when and how and why information would be released, and also how often. And our understanding at this moment in time is that this type of information is released only in a very, very small number of cases. I think were talking less than 1 per cent of cases suzy davies am: One per cent of what figure though? karen cornish: in the last year. suzy davies am: Okay, but it helps us to understand the general amount karen cornish: So, its about two, three, four cases in a year where this type of information is disclosed. Its information that, obviously, we have got, but I think its really important to understand that this is a really rigorous process that the police and the DBS have in place. They consider everything in the round before they would even consider actually releasing any information that's non-conviction information in relation to employment. Are you concerned that, in order to be on the safe side, if I can put it like that, there's an increased likelihood of disclosurewhich actually might disappear over time, because there's an opportunity to exercise judgment more frequently and get the balance right? karen cornish: I think they do have to consider non-conviction information now and some of that non-conviction information may be in relation to physical punishment of a child. I think you've received evidence from the police saying that there are 18,000 or so incidents in one police force area alone, where information is potentially on their records, and yet we understand that a very, very small proportion of non-conviction information is released to an employer during a recruitment process. So, our expectation, based on that information, would be that it would remain at a very low level. And just to finish off on this one: we don't have legislative competence in this particular area, so we are relying on goodwill and the conversations that you have, which I'm sure are very productive. What will happen if we start getting instances where perhaps that judgment hasn't been exercised correctly? There's nothing, as a Government, you can do to challenge that particularly. julie morgan am: I can only emphasise the very close working relationships we've got and I think will continue to build as we introduce this legislation. Just before we move on, could I ask, then? Maybe the committee would be grateful for a note providing an update on the latest work that the Government has done on out-of-court disposals, including estimated costs. We'd also appreciate a note on the Welsh Government's discussions with the DBS and the figures that Karen just referred to, if that's okay, please. hefin david am: When you first appeared before the committee at the beginning of Stage 1, I wasn't hugely reassured by the evidence you gave on the resource implications of the Bill. It seems to be relying, to a great extent, on the limited number of reporting of cases that's likely to happen, as we've seen in the evidence we've received.That's largely been recognised by the stakeholders who've given evidence, but isn't there still the potential for a degree of unknown costs to come into this, and what planning have you done for those unknown coststhose unforeseen coststhat might occur? julie morgan am: I feel that. You're right that there always could be unknown costs, but we are doing our very best to prepare to cover all eventualities that we can anticipate. For example, I've committed to fund the high-intensity awareness-raising campaign, and committed to carry out a mapping exercise to establish whether there are any gaps in the parenting support. We know that evidence from other countries does show that, if we bring in this legislation and raise awareness, it does change people's attitudes, so there may, in the long term, be a saving if we do that. But we are committed to working with organisations to put in place arrangements so that we're able to collect the data so that we know what the impact is. But I just have to repeat that all our evidence, looking at other countries, is that there isn't a huge increase in the workload. I think you can make the argument for precedent elsewhere, but you can also say that every country has a different culture and approach to how it raises children, and therefore there'll be a number of differences as well. It talks about unknown costs in relation to social services as a result of a potential increasing referrals; family courts and CAFCASS Cymru as a result of a potential increase in allegations, which we talked about; the CPS and a higher volume of requests for charging advice from the police; and the review of training and guidance offered by organisations involved in the safeguarding of children. All those things we've talked around, but what would be reassuring for the committee is, perhaps, if you could give us a broad figure, which the Government would say, 'We'll need to set this number aside in order to be prepared for the implementation of this Bill.' Would you be willing to present that at some point during the passage of the Bill? julie morgan am: I think we have to rely on what the people who run those organisations are telling us. I think the other important thing to recognise is that this area of work is already dealt with by all these people. So, the CPS is already involved in changing its guidance all the time, so it's not going to be much of an impact for them to actually have to do that over this issue. Social services are already dealing with calls and referrals about the physical punishment of children already, including reasonable punishment. I accept that we're working in a situation where there's a general pressure on public services, but I think this area that we're legislating on here is part of what everybody's doing already. hefin david am: That's a perfectly reasonable answer, but then what about providing a ballpark figure for a kind unforeseen fund that you might set aside? julie morgan am: I don't think it's possible to do that. We've got to have baseline data to begin with, and that's what's so difficult to get, because we can't get that from other countries. Only New Zealand recorded any incidents before they actually brought in the legislation, and they did that for three months beforehand. That's why we've been looking at New Zealand a lot of the time, just to make predictions. One of these sub-groups is looking at data, so that sub-group should be very productive, I think. And the last question, with regard to resourcing, just to understand the process of how this ties into the wider budgetingdid you and your officials sit down with the Finance Minister and the First Minister's officials to discuss the costing of this? I imagine so. What was the nature of that kind of discussion? julie morgan am: Some of the costings are decided. For example, the advertising, the awareness-raising campaignthat's 2.2 million over six years. And who were the discussions with? karen cornish: There has been an in-the-round discussion before the Bill was introduced, at which the First Minister and the finance Minister and others were present. karen cornish: The consultation and then the Bill going forward has been discussed by Cabinet, and gone through Cabinet processes, as you would expect. hefin david am: So, are we able to say that the Government as a whole is satisfied that there isn't going to be a huge impact on resource as a result of the introduction of this Bill? karen cornish: I think what you can say is that the Government are satisfied that they are supportive of the Bill and have put the Bill forward. Are you satisfied that that amount of money2.5 million over five years [correction: 2.2 million over six years]is going to be enough? From memory, with the organ donation Bill, the amount was something in the region of around 7 million that was set aside, I think. Or maybe I'm misremembering that, but karen cornish: I think it was about 4 million lynne neagle am: 4 million karen cornish: Something like that. You've got to reach a lot of people, haven't you, with this, including some pretty hard-to-reach groups as well. Are you confident that amount of money is going to be enough? karen cornish: We are as confident as we can be at this moment in time. We are obviously going to be working with focus groups and others to look at what sorts of messaging there will need to be. But in terms of the initial stages of the awareness campaign, we are, as I say, as confident as we can be, based on what we know. hefin david am: I just wanted to ask a very specific question on human rights, because, you know, when it comes to appeals, there are a variety of articles under the European Convention on Human Rights that might be used with regard to a challenge to the law as enacted. For the purpose of the record, can you outline to us the assessment you've made in preparation for this Bill in relation to the balancing of relevant articles of the European Convention on Human Rights, including but not limited to article 8 on the respect for private life; article 9, freedom of conscience and religion; article 3, the right to protection from torture and inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment; and article 14, protection from discrimination? julie morgan am: Thank you very much. We have given a great deal of thought, as you can imagine, to the human rights considerations as set out in our impact assessments, and it's ultimately a question how we find a balance between the rights of children as well as parents, who both enjoy rights under the European Convention on Human Rights. So, article 3 is the prohibition of torture: 'No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.' In ensuring that children are protected from physical punishment in the same way as adults, the Bill is following that requirement of article 3, and the positive obligations on states to protect individuals from ill treatment or punishment that is contrary to article 3. And then, in terms of article 8, right to respect for private and family life, 'Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence.' Some of those who are opposed to the prohibition of physical punishment have cited article 8, private and family life, and also cited article 9, freedom of thought, conscience and religion, as potentially protecting the right for parents to decide how best to punish their children, including the use of physical punishment. But these rights are not absolute, and action can therefore be taken that interferes with them, provided the interference is justified. It's the Government's view that the Bill's provisions are necessary in order to protect the rights and freedom of children. The Bill's provisions are regarded as proportionate measures, and given the fundamental importance of protecting children from inhumane or degrading punishment or other ill treatment, we do consider that we have balanced the rights in a proportionate way. And then, article 10, freedom of expression, and article 14, prohibition of discriminationthese rights are not absolute and action can be taken, therefore, that interferes with them, providing the interference is justified. We don't think it's clear that article 10 and 14 rights are being interfered with, but even if they are, we consider we can justify the interference in order to protect the rights and freedoms of children. I think it's the equality impact assessment that sets out the positive and negative impacts of the proposal and the balancing of the rights enjoyed by both parents and children. So, last week, the Welsh Government published its baseline survey of public attitudes to physical punishment of children, and that showed us that 58 per cent of the public already thought the law did not allow parents to smack their children. You could think glass half full, which suggests that we don't have many people to try and convince of that. But on the flipside of that, would you suggest, perhaps, that that data shows there is a challenge faced by the Welsh Government to make sure the public understand the proposed legislation, given that more than half of the population, according to those statistics, have a complete misunderstanding of the current law? julie morgan am: Certainly, I think that finding is reflected in people I speak to who do think that the law does not allow parents to hit their children. , I'm personally very reassured that 58 per cent of the public think the law doesn't allow that to happen because I think, well, they're not hitting their children, so we're over 50 per cent of where we want to get. So, I think that is a good thing, but it does highlight the fact that the legislation, as it is, is confused. We need much greater clarity in the law for professionals who are working and trying to help parents, and for parents themselves. So, I think that this is a case for saying that it's very important that we carry out this legislation to make it all much clearer. vikki howells am: One of the most consistent messages that this committee has heard is that the proposed law won't work unless there's a significant campaign to raise awareness with members of the public. We know that Sweden went to considerable lengths to publicise the change in the law there, and I can remember attending a cross-party group, chaired by yourself, Deputy Minister, where we heard evidence from Ireland to the same effect, as wellthe necessity of the public awareness campaign. You already said that a duty on the face of the Bill to raise awareness is not necessary, but then, in your answer to Suzy Davies, you said you would consider putting some things on the face of the Bill. So, can you explain to us your key arguments surrounding this issue? julie morgan am: I absolutely agree that it's essential that we do have a big awareness campaign, because all the research we've had shows, in fact, that if you don't have the awareness campaign, the legislation won't be as effective. I don't think it's absolutely necessary to have it on the face of the Bill, but as I said to Suzy, I'm prepared to consider anything the committee is bringing forward because I'm very keen for this Bill to progress through this process and to learn from it. And finally, New Zealand is an oft-cited example, mentioned in the explanatory memorandum as well. So, we know New Zealand prohibited physical punishment in 2007, but yet in a non-binding referendum two years later, 87.5 per cent of voters voted 'no' in response to the question, 'Should a smack, as part of good parental correction, be a criminal offence in New Zealand?' On what basis, then, are you confident that this sort of polarisation won't happen in Wales, especially considering the current political climate there is out there? julie morgan am: Well, what we trying to do is we're trying to take this forward in as consensual a way as we possibly can. All those people who don't agree with us, who are a minority, it seems, we want to hear what they've got to say, taking very seriously all the points that are raised here by the committee. I haven't seen any sign of any polarisation in any way that I would be concerned about, because, certainly, the people who do oppose the Bill, I've met with them, I know they've given evidence to your committee and the views of parents have been taken into account. I hope that they then, if the Bill does become law, will then accept and respect the democratic process. janet finch-saunders am: I started at the very beginning, Deputy Minister, with the fact that there's an overwhelming majority of parentsthose who are naturally charged with raising their childrenagainst this Bill. We've gone out to survey on it and the overwhelming response from parents is that they do not support this Bill. julie morgan am: I think that our representative surveys that we've carried out do show considerable support for the Bill janet finch-saunders am: But not from parents. And it's older people who are much less likely to support the legislation, and I think it's all linked to what many of us were used to, what happened in our childhoods, when it was accepted and it was part of the time that this was what you did. So, I think many older people, because they smacked their children or were smacked themselves, have felt a degree of resistance, perhaps, to the Bill. We want to respect children's rights and what happened in the past is in the past now, and we want to have a new era for respecting children's human rights and dignity. And I think I'll go back to what I said: I don't see that children's rights to dignity is going to happen if a big person is able to hit a small person. lynne neagle am: Just to clarify, Janet's referring to the committee's consultation and the percentage of responses that we've had. sian gwenllian am: Yes, we had a specific section, but because time is moving quite fast, perhaps you could give us a note in response. Some witnesses saw a risk that the Bill could have a disproportionate impact on specific groupswomen, because they are the main carers, minority ethnic groups and very young children. So, if it would be possible for us to receive a note as to whether you agree that this will have a disproportionate impact upon them, and if so, what would be the mitigating measures you would take. But, specifically, we have heard from several witnesses and the equality impact assessment of the Bill does acknowledge that a low income is a risk factor in the use of physical punishment and that this could have a negative impact specifically on this group of parents. Now, we know that Flying Start is available to try to mitigate that to some degree, but of course not all low-income families live within a Flying Start area, so what mitigating work will you be undertaking in that regard? julie morgan am: Yes. We are running focus groups where we will be taking the different groups into account, and we will work with different groups, communities and organisations to make sure that they are aware of the change in the law, and we willI know you want to move onbut we will write to you about anything more specific. lynne neagle am: Just finally from me, then, you referred to the mapping exercise, which is very welcomed by the committee. Should that mapping exercise identify gaps? Will the Welsh Government be making a commitment to provide funding to plug those gaps so that there is a universal offer of parenting support for families in Wales? julie morgan am: We will certainly consider it at that point. As usual, you will be sent a transcript to check for accuracy following the meeting, but thank you very much to the three of you for your time this morning. julie morgan am: Thank you very much, and thank you for all the questions and the wide range that we covered. Paper to note 1 is a letter from the Deputy Minister for Health and Social Services, providing additional information following the evidence session on 2 May for this Bill. Paper to note 2 is a letter from the Deputy Minister for Health and Social Services in response to the committee's letter, which requested informationon CAFCASS Cymru's response on specific points of interest in relation to the Bill. And paper to note 3 is a letter from the Deputy Minister for Health and Social Services making the committee aware of research undertaken in relation to public attitudes to physical punishment. Can I ask if Members are happy to note those? suzy davies am: Can I just make one observation? I think it's on the first of the letters, which is the difficulty that there's been in trying to disaggregate the evidence of smacking as isolated incidents as compared to smacking as part of a bigger pattern of behaviour. Item 4, then, is a motion under Standing Order 17.42 to resolve to exclude the public from the remainder of the meeting
three two three four seven six five five three one six two four one six seven seven eight nine zero nine four zero zero three zero one five eight one seven three five three two six eight zero three six two four three zero seven four five zero six nine four seven four eight five seven nine six one five O seven eight O two zero nine six zero four zero zero one two  Yeah , you don't actually n need to say the name . grad c: OK , this is Barry Chen and I am reading transcript professor f: That 'll probably be bleeped out . professor f:   not that there 's anything defamatory about  eight five seven or or anything , but grad c: OK .  so here 's what I have for I I was just jotting down things I think th w that we should do today .  This is what I have for an agenda so far  , We should talk a little bit about the plans for the  the field trip next week .  a number of us are doing a field trip to   OGI And  mostly  First though about the logistics for it . professor f: in and kind of go around see what people have been doing talk about that , a r progress report . If we find some holes in some things that that someone could use some help with , he 's he 's volunteering to help . So , and  , then  , talk a little bit about about disks and resource resource issues that that 's starting to get worked out . And then , anything else anybody has that isn't in that list ?  grad d: I was just wondering , does this mean the battery 's dying and I should change it ? professor f:  I think that means the battery 's O K . professor f: d do you grad d: Oh OK , so th phd a: Yeah , that 's good .   I I it was it was kind of my bright idea to have us take a plane that leaves at seven twenty in the morning .  this is  The reason I did it  was because otherwise for those of us who have to come back the same day it is really not much of a of a visit .  So  the issue is how how how would we ever accomplish that ?  what what what part of town do you live in ? grad c: I live in , the corner of campus . OK , so would it be easier those of you who are not , you know , used to this area , it can be very tricky to get to the airport at at  , you know , six thirty . Would it be easier for you if you came here and I drove you ? Yeah ? Yeah , yeah , OK . It 'll take it it it won't be bad traffic that time of day and and  phd a: I guess once you get past the bridge that that would be the worst . professor f: And then Martin Luther King to nine - eighty to eight - eighty , phd a: Yeah . phd a: Oh , I professor f: So that leaves us fifty minutes before the plane it 'll just yeah . So Great , OK so that 'll It 's  , it 's still not going to be really easy but well Particularly for for  for Barry and me , we 're not we 're not staying overnight so we don't need to bring anything particularly except for  a pad of paper and So , and ,  you , two have to bring a little bit grad c: OK . professor f: but  you know , don't don't bring a footlocker and we 'll be OK So .  I 'll I 'll I 'll I 'll give you my phone number , If I 'm not here for a few m after a few minutes then grad c: Wake you up . I just ,  it for me it just means getting up a half an hour earlier than I usually do .  , I I I figured maybe wait on the potential goals for the meeting  until we talk about wh what 's been going on . phd g: So , it means that  , well , it is , a digit French database of microphone speech , downsampled to eight kilohertz and I 've added noise to one part , with the actually the Aurora - two noises . professor f: OK  , So the HTK base lines so this is using mel cepstra and so on , or ? Yeah . professor f: And again , I guess the p the plan is , to  then given this What 's the plan again ? phd g: The plan with these data ? professor f: With So So Does i Just remind me of what what you were going to do with the what what what what 's y You just described what you 've been doing . phd g:  we actually we want to , mmm , analyze three dimensions , the feature dimension , the training data dimension , and the test data dimension . So we have the  , TI - digit task , the Italian task , the French task and the Finnish task . professor f: Yeah ? phd g: So we have numbers with  systems   neural networks trained on the task data . And then to have systems with neural networks trained on , data from the same language , if possible , with , well , using a more generic database , which is phonetically phonetically balanced , and . professor f: So - so we had talked I guess we had talked at one point about maybe , the language ID corpus ? phd g: Yeah . professor f: Is that a possibility for that ? phd g: Ye -  Yeah , but ,  these corpus , w w there is a CallHome and a CallFriend also , The CallFriend is for language ind identification . This could be a a problem for Why ? Because  , the the SpeechDat databases are not telephone speech . That 's really funny isn't it ?  cuz th this whole thing is for developing new standards for the telephone . phd g: Yeah , but the the idea is to compute the feature before the before sending them to the Well , you don't do not send speech , you send features , computed on th the the device , professor f:   professor f: Oh I see , so your point is that it 's it 's it 's  the features are computed locally , and so they aren't necessarily telephone bandwidth ,  or telephone distortions . phd a: Did you happen to find out anything about the OGI multilingual database ? professor f: Yeah , that 's wh that 's wh that 's what I meant . phd g: Yeah , it 's professor f: I said @ @ , there 's there 's there 's an OGI language ID , not the not the ,  the CallFriend is a is a , LDC w thing , right ? phd g: Yea - Yeah , there are also two other databases . One they call the multi - language database , and another one is a twenty - two language , something like that . professor f: But I 'm not sure phd g: So professor f: we ' r e e The bandwidth shouldn't be such an issue right ? Because e e this is downsampled and and filtered , right ? So it 's just the fact that it 's not telephone .  some of this stuff 's recorded in the car , and some of it 's  there 's there 's many different acoustic differences .  , unless we 're going to include a bunch of car recordings in the in the training database , I 'm not sure if it 's completely rules it out phd g: Yeah . professor f: if our if we if our major goal is to have phonetic context and you figure that there 's gonna be a mismatch in acoustic conditions does it make it much worse f to sort of add another mismatch , if you will . professor f: i i I I guess the question is how important is it to for us to get multiple languages  , in there . Well , actually , for the moment if we w do not want to use these phone databases , we we already have  English , Spanish and French  , with microphone speech . professor f: So that 's what you 're thinking of using is sort of the multi the equivalent of the multiple ? phd g: Well . phd g: So w f for for  Italian , which is close to Spanish , French and , i i  , TI - digits we have both  , digits training data and also more general training data . professor f: Well , we also have this Broadcast News that we were talking about taking off the disk , which is is microphone data for for English . phd g: Yeah , and perhaps ,  We were thinking that perhaps the cross - language issue is not , so big of a issue . u So that th Well , the the guy who has to develop an application with one language can use the net trained o on that language , or a generic net , professor f: depen it depen it depends how you mean " using the net " . phd g: but not trained on a professor f: So , if you 're talking about for producing these discriminative features that we 're talking about you can't do that . But if we say , " No , you have to have a different feature set for each language , " I think this is ver gonna be very bad .  , in principle ,  conceptually , it 's sort of like they want a re @ @ well , they want a replacement for mel cepstra . professor f: So , we say " OK , this is the year two thousand , we 've got something much better than mel cepstra . " OK ? And so we give them these gobbledy - gook features but these gobbledy - gook features are supposed to be good for any language . professor f: Cuz you don't know who 's gonna call , and you know ,  so it 's it 's it 's ,  how do you know what language it is ? Somebody picks up the phone . Someone picks up the phone , right ? phd g: Well , I chh professor f: And and he he picks up the ph phd g: Yeah , but the the application is there is a target language for the application . professor f: you talk on the phone , phd g: Yeah ? professor f: and it sends features out . If it 's th in the phone , but professor f: But that 's the image that they have . phd g: well , it that that could be th at the server 's side , professor f: It could be , phd g: and , well . professor f: but that 's the image they have , right ? So that 's that 's  , one could argue all over the place about how things really will be in ten years . But the particular image that the cellular industry has right now is that it 's distributed speech recognition , where the , probabilistic part , and and s semantics and so forth are all on the servers , and you compute features of the  , on the phone . We might might or might not agree that that 's the way it will be in ten years , but that 's that 's that 's what they 're asking for . Now , it 's the OGI , folks ' perspective right now that probably that 's not the biggest deal . And they may very well be right , but I I was hoping we could just do a test and determine if that was true . Maybe maybe we have a couple languages in the training set and that gives us enough breadth  , that that that the rest doesn't matter .  , the other thing is , this notion of training to  which I I guess they 're starting to look at up there , training to something more like articulatory features .  , and if you have something that 's just good for distinguishing different articulatory features that should just be good across , you know , a wide range of languages . professor f: but Yeah , so I don't th I know unfortunately I don't I see what you 're comi where you 're coming from , I think , but I don't think we can ignore it .  , tr for instance training on English and testing on Italian , or Or we can train or else , can we train a net on , a range of languages and which can include the test the test @ @ the target language , grad c: Test on an unseen . phd g: or professor f: Yeah , so , there 's there 's ,  This is complex . So , ultimately , as I was saying , I think it doesn't fit within their image that you switch nets based on language . professor f: from a purist 's standpoint it 'd be nice not to because then you can say when because surely someone is going to say at some point , " OK , so you put in the German and the Finnish . professor f: now , what do you do , when somebody has Portuguese ? " you know ?  , and  , however , you aren't it isn't actually a constraint in this evaluation . So I would say if it looks like there 's a big difference to put it in , then we 'd make note of it , and then we probably put in the other , because we have so many other problems in trying to get things to work well here that that , you know , it 's not so bad as long as we we note it and say , " Look , we did do this " . phd g: Mmm ? phd a: And so , ideally , what you 'd wanna do is you 'd wanna run it with and without the target language and the training set for a wide range of languages . phd a: And that way you can say , " Well , " you know , " we 're gonna build it for what we think are the most common ones " , professor f: Yeah . phd a: but if that somebody uses it with a different language , you know , " here 's what 's you 're l here 's what 's likely to happen . " professor f: Yeah , cuz the truth is , is that it 's it 's not like there are  , al although there are thousands of languages , from  , the point of view of cellular companies , there aren't . professor f: There 's you know , there 's fifty or something , you know ? So , an and they aren't you know , with the exception of Finnish , which I guess it 's pretty different from most most things . I guess Finnish is a is is a little bit like Hungarian , supposedly , right ? phd a: I don't know anything about Finnish . professor f: Or is I think well , I kn oh , well I know that H  , H  , I 'm not a linguist , but I guess Hungarian and Finnish and one of the one of the languages from the former Soviet Union are in this sort of same family . professor f: But they 're just these , you know ,  countries that are pretty far apart from one another , have I guess , people rode in on horses and brought their phd a:  . I re - installed , HTK , the free version , so , everybody 's now using three point O , which is the same version that , OGI is using . And , so we 've been talking about this this , cube thing , and it 's beginning more and more looking like the , the Borge cube thing .  , but I I 'm Am I professor f: So are are you going to be assimilated ? phd a: Resistance is futile .  , the the stuff that we 've been working on with TIMIT , trying to get a ,  a labels file so we can , train up a train up a net on TIMIT and test , the difference between this net trained on TIMIT and a net trained on digits alone . professor f: And again , when y just to clarify , when you 're talking about training up a net , you 're talking about training up a net for a tandem approach ? grad c: Yeah , yeah . professor f: And and the inputs are PLP and delta and that sort of thing , grad c: Well , the inputs are one dimension of the cube , professor f: or ? grad c: which , we 've talked about it being , PLP , M F C Cs , J - JRASTA , JRASTA - LDA phd g:  . professor f: Yeah , but your initial things you 're making one choice there , grad c: Yeah , professor f: right ? grad c: right . professor f: Which is PLP , or something ? grad c: I I haven't I haven't decided on on the initial thing .  , so so you take PLP and you you , do it  , you you , use HTK with it with the transformed features using a neural net that 's trained . professor f: And that 's the and , and th and then the testing would be these other things which which which might be foreign language .  , those listening to this will not have a picture either , so , I guess I 'm I 'm not any worse off . It sounds s I I get I think I get the general idea of it , grad c: Yeah , yeah , professor f: yeah . phd a: So , when you said that you were getting the labels for TIMIT , are y what do you mean by that ? grad c: b May   Oh , I 'm just I 'm just , transforming them from the , the standard TIMIT transcriptions into into a nice long huge P - file to do training . Were the digits , hand - labeled for phones ? grad c: the the digits phd a: Or were they those labels automatically derived ? grad c: Oh yeah , those were those were automatically derived by by Dan using , embedded embedded training and alignment . phd a: I was just wondering because that test you 're t grad c:  - huh . phd a: I I think you 're doing this test because you want to determine whether or not , having s general speech performs as well as having specific speech . professor f: Well , especially when you go over the different languages again , because you 'd the different languages have different words for the different digits , phd a:   And I was professor f: so it 's phd a: yeah , so I was just wondering if the fact that TIMIT you 're using the hand - labeled stuff from TIMIT might be confuse the results that you get . phd a: Right , but if it 's better , it may be better because it was hand - labeled . professor f: you know , I I I guess I 'm sounding cavalier , but  , I think the point is you have , a bunch of labels and and they 're han hand  hand - marked . It would be another interesting scientific question to ask , " Is it because it 's a broad source or because it was , you know , carefully ? " phd a:   And that 's something you could ask , but given limited time , I think the main thing is if it 's a better thing for going across languages on this training tandem system , phd a: Yeah . professor f: then it 's probably phd a: What about the differences in the phone sets ? grad c: between languages ? phd a: No , between TIMIT and the the digits . Well , there 's a mapping from the sixty - one phonemes in TIMIT to to fifty - six , the ICSI fifty - six . grad c: And then the digits phonemes , there 's about twenty twenty - two or twenty - four of them ? Is that right ? phd a: Out of that fifty - six ? phd g: Yep . phd g: But , actually , the issue of phoneti phon  phone phoneme mappings will arise when we will do severa use several languages phd e: Yeah . phd g: because you Well , some phonemes are not , in every languages , and So we plan to develop a subset of the phonemes , that includes , all the phonemes of our training languages , phd a:   phd e: SAMPA phone ? For English  American English , and the the the language who have more phone are the English . But n for example , in Spain , the Spanish have several phone that d doesn't appear in the E English and we thought to complete . But for that , it needs we must r h do a lot of work because we need to generate new tran transcription for the database that we have . phd b: Other than the language , is there a reason not to use the TIMIT phone set ? Cuz it 's larger ? As opposed to the ICSI phone set ? grad c: Oh , you mean why map the sixty - one to the fifty - six ? phd b: Yeah . I have professor f: I forget if that happened starting with you , or was it o or if it was Eric , afterwards who did that . phd a: Yeah , and I think some of them , they were making distinctions between silence at the end and silence at the beginning , when really they 're both silence . phd a: I th I think it was things like that that got it mapped down to fifty - six . professor f: Yeah , especially in a system like ours , which is a discriminative system . And the ones that are gone , I think are I think there was they also in TIMIT had like a glottal stop , which was basically a short period of silence , phd b:   phd b: Well , we have that now , too , right ? phd a: I don't know . professor f: i It 's actually pretty common that a lot of the recognition systems people use have things like like , say thirty - nine , phone symbols , right ?  , and then they get the variety by by bringing in the context , the phonetic context . What there 's Can you describe what what 's on the cube ? grad c: Yeah , w I th I think that 's a good idea professor f:  grad c: to to talk about the whole cube professor f: Yeah , yeah .  , do you wanna do it ? professor f: OK , so even even though the meeting recorder doesn't doesn't ,  and since you 're not running a video camera we won't get this , but if you use a board it 'll help us anyway . professor f: but you 've got the wireless on , grad c: Yeah , I have the wireless . OK , well , professor f: he can't , actually , but grad c: s basically , the the cube will have three dimensions . So the the training for HTK is always that 's always set up for the individual test , right ? That there 's some training data and some test data . And , yeah , the training for the HTK models is always , fixed for whatever language you 're testing on . So , then I think it 's probably instructive to go and and and show you the features that we were talking about . grad c: Yeah , just the multi - band features , right ? phd g: And grad c: Yeah . phd a: What about mel cepstrum ? Or is that grad c: Oh ,  phd a: you don't include that because it 's part of the base or something ? phd e: Yeah databases . professor f: Well , y you do have a baseline system that 's m that 's mel cepstra , phd e: Yeah .  at least at least conceptually , you know , it doesn't meant you actually have to do it , phd g: Yeah . phd a: It 'd be an interesting test just to have just to do MFCC with the neural net phd e: Without the phd a: and everything else the same . D Because I think that for a bunch of their experiments they used , mel cepstra , actually . phd a: Is that Was that distributed with Aurora , or ? grad c: One L or two L 's ? phd a: Where did that ? professor f: The newer one . And , oh yeah , and professor f: Is it French French or Belgian French ? There 's a phd g: It 's , French French . Yeah , Herve always insists that Belgian is i is absolutely pure French , has nothing to do with but he says those those those Parisians talk funny . grad c: right ? Spanish Oh , Spanish stories ? phd e: Albayzin is the name . phd a: What about TI - digits ? grad c: TI - digits  all these Aurora f d data p data is from is derived from TI - digits . grad c: basically , they they corrupted it with , different kinds of noises at different SNR levels . professor f: y And I think Stephane was saying there 's there 's some broader s material in the French also ? phd g: Yeah , we cou we could use grad c: OK . phd b: Did the Aurora people actually corrupt it themselves , or just specify the signal and the signal - t grad c: They they corrupted it , themselves , phd b: OK . grad c: but they also included the the noise files for us , right ? Or phd g: Yeah . professor f: I 'm just curious , Carmen  , I couldn't tell if you were joking or i Is it is it Mexican Spanish , phd e: No no no no . phd g: Yeah , the No , the French is f yeah , from , Paris , grad c: Oh , from Paris , OK . And , with within the training corporas  , we 're , thinking about , training with noise . So , incorporating the same kinds of noises that , Aurora is in incorporating in their ,  in their training corpus .  , I don't think we we 're given the ,  the unseen noise conditions , though , right ? professor f: I think what they were saying was that , for this next test there 's gonna be some of the cases where they have the same type of noise as you were given before hand and some cases where you 're not . professor f: So , presumably , that 'll be part of the topic of analysis of the the test results , is how well you do when it 's matching noise and how well you do where it 's not . grad c: So , I guess we can't train on on the the unseen noise conditions .  , i i i i it does seem to me that a lot of times when you train with something that 's at least a little bit noisy it can it can help you out in other kinds of noise even if it 's not matching just because there 's some more variance that you 've built into things . professor f: exactly how well it will work will depend on how near it is to what you had ahead of time . professor f: and then your testing corpus ? grad c: the testing corporas are , just , the same ones as Aurora testing . grad c: we ' r we 're gonna get German , right ? Ge - At the final test will have German . professor f: Well , so , yeah , the final test , on a guess , is supposed to be German and Danish , phd g: yeah . professor f: Oh , there 's a there 's Spanish testing in the Aurora ? phd g: not yet , but , yeah , e phd e: Yeah , it 's preparing . phd g: and , well , according to Hynek it will be we will have this at the end of November , or  . phd g: Yeah professor f: So that 's , three hundred and forty - three , different systems that are going to be developed . grad d: What a what about noise conditions ? professor f: What ? grad d: w Don't we need to put in the column for noise conditions ? professor f: Are you just trying to be difficult ? grad d: No , I just don't understand . grad c: Well , th  , when when I put these testings on there , I 'm assumi professor f: I 'm just kidding . And they 're all they 're all gonna be test tested , with one training of the HTK system . grad d: And do we do all our training on clean data ? grad c: no , no , phd e: Also , we can clean that . grad c: we 're we 're gonna be , training on the noise files that we do have . professor f: So ,  Yeah , so I guess the question is how long does it take to do a a training ?  , it 's not totally crazy t  , these are a lot of these are built - in things and we know we have programs that compute PLP , we have MSG , we have JRA you know , a lot of these things will just kind of happen , won't take  a huge amount of development , it 's just trying it out . professor f: But how how long does it take , do we think , for one of these trainings ? grad c: That 's a good question .  , cuz , so , for instance , I think the major advantage of MSG grad c: Oh ! professor f: Yeah , grad c: Och ! professor f: good point . A major advantage of MSG , I see , th that we 've seen in the past is combined with PLP . grad c: Now , this is turning into a four - dimensional cube ? phd a: Well , you just select multiple things on the one dimension . professor f: Yeah , so , you don't wanna ,  Let 's see , seven choose two would be , twenty - one different combinations . phd b: It 's not a complete set of combinations , though , professor f: Probably phd b: right ? It 's not a complete set of combinations , though , professor f: What ? phd b: right ? grad c: No . Yeah , there 's grad c: That would be professor f: yeah , so PLP and MSG I think we definitely wanna try cuz we 've had a lot of good experience with putting those together . phd a: When you do that , you 're increasing the size of the inputs to the net . Do you have to reduce the hidden layer , or something ? professor f: Well , so  , so i it doesn't increase the number of trainings . phd a: No , no , I 'm I 'm just wondering about number of parameters in the net . Do you have to worry about keeping that the same , or ? professor f: I don't think so . phd b: There 's a computation limit , though , isn't there ? professor f: Yeah , it 's just more compu Excuse me ? phd b: Isn't there like a limit on the computation load , or d latency , or something like that for Aurora task ? professor f: Oh yeah , we haven't talked about any of that at all , have we ? grad c: No . What it is is that there 's there 's ,  it 's just penalty , you know ? That that if you 're using , a megabyte , then they 'll say that 's very nice , but , of course , it will never go on a cheap cell phone .  , and , expensive cell phones , exa expensive hand - helds , and so forth , are gonna have lots of memory . So it 's just that , these people see the the cheap cell phones as being still the biggest market , so . But , yeah , I was just realizing that , actually , it doesn't explode out ,  It 's not really two to the seventh . But it 's but but i i it doesn't really explode out the number of trainings cuz these were all trained individually . Right ? So , if you have all of these nets trained some place , then , you can combine their outputs and do the KL transformation and so forth grad c:   phd a: But wh what about a net that 's trained on multiple languages , though ? professor f: Well , you gotta do the KL transformation , phd g: Eight y professor f: but phd a: Is that just separate nets for each language then combined , or is that actually one net trained on ? phd e: Necessary to put in . Right ? phd g: So , in the broader training corpus we can we can use , the three , or , a combination of of two two languages . professor f: Yeah , so , I guess the first thing is if w if we know how much a how long a a training takes , if we can train up all these these combinations , then we can start working on testing of them individually , and in combination . professor f: Because the putting them in combination , I think , is not as much computationally as the r training of the nets in the first place . But there is the testing also , which implies training , the HTK models phd e: The the model the HTK model . professor f: How long does it take for an , HTK training ? phd g: It 's around six hours , I think . professor f: No , I 'm sorry , ru running on what machine ? phd e: Ravioli . phd g: Yeah , I I think it 's - it 's - it 's not so long because , well , the TI - digits test data is about ,  how many hours ?  , th  , thirty hours of speech , I think , professor f: It 's a few hours . professor f: so , clearly , there there 's no way we can even begin to do an any significant amount here unless we use multiple machines . professor f: Right ? So so w we  there 's plenty of machines here and they 're n they 're often not in in a great great deal of use . So , I think it 's it 's key that that the that you look at , you know , what machines are fast , what machines are used a lot  , are we still using P - make ? Is that ? grad c: Oh , I don't know how w how we would P - make this , though . professor f: Well , you have a  , once you get the basic thing set up , you have just all the  , a all these combinations , grad c: Yeah . It 's it 's let 's say it 's six hours or eight hours , or something for the training of HTK . How long is it for training of of , the neural net ? grad c: The neural net ?  . phd b: How big is the net ? phd e: For Albayzin I trained on neural network , was , one day also . professor f: And I think there there there 's I think you folks are probably go the ones using them right now . phd a: Is it faster to do it on the SPERT , or ? professor f: don't know . grad c: It 's it 's still a little faster on the professor f: Used to be . Or either Adam or or Dan did some testing and they found that the SPERT board 's still still faster . grad c: And the benefits is that , you know , you run out of SPERT and then you can do other things on your your computer , professor f:   You could set up , you know , ten different jobs , or something , to run on SPERT different SPERT boards and and have ten other jobs running on different computers . So , it 's got to take that sort of thing , or or we 're not going to get through any significant number of these . professor f:  So this is Yeah , I kind of like this because what it No grad c: OK . professor f: no , what I like about it is we we we do have a problem that we have very limited time . You know , so , with very limited time , we actually have really quite a quite a bit of computational resource available if you , you know , get a look across the institute and how little things are being used . And  , on the other hand , almost anything that really i you know , is is new , where we 're saying , " Well , let 's look at , like we were talking before about , voiced - unvoiced - silence detection features and all those sort " that 's phd e: Yeah . But if it 's new , then we have this development and and and learning process t to to go through on top of just the the all the all the work . So what I like about this is you basically have listed all the things that we already know how to do . And , you 're just saying let 's look at the outer product of all of these things and see if we can calculate them . a a Am I am I interpreting this correctly ? Is this sort of what what you 're thinking of doing in the short term ? phd g: Mmm . professor f: So so then I think it 's just the the missing piece is that you need to , you know you know , talk to talk to , Chuck , talk to , Adam , sort out about , what 's the best way to really , you know , attack this as a as a as a mass problem in terms of using many machines .  , and  , then , you know , set it up in terms of scripts and so forth , and  , in in kind o some kind of structured way .  , and , you know , when we go to , OGI next week , we can then present to them , you know , what it is that we 're doing . And , we can pull things out of this list that we think they are doing sufficiently , grad c: Mmm . professor f: that , you know , we 're not we won't be contributing that much . phd b: How big are the nets you 're using ? grad c: for the for nets trained on digits , we have been using , four hundred order hidden units . And , for the broader class nets we 're we 're going to increase that because the , the digits nets only correspond to about twenty phonemes .  , w we 're gonna professor f: Oh , it 's not actually broader class , it 's actually finer class , but you mean y You mean more classes . professor f: Carmen , did you do you have something else to add ? We you haven't talked too much , and phd e: D I begin to work with the Italian database to nnn , to with the f front - end and with the HTK program and the @ @ . And I trained eh , with the Spanish two neural network with PLP and with LogRASTA PLP . professor f: Well , JRASTA has the potential to do better , but it doesn't always . It 's it 's ,  instead of doing RASTA with a log , you 're doing RASTA with a log - like function that varies depending on a J parameter , which is supposed to be sensitive to the amount of noise there is . So , it 's sort of like the right transformation to do the filtering in , is dependent on how much noise there is . It 's a little complicated because once you do that , you end up in some funny domain and you end up having to do a transformation afterwards , which requires some tables . professor f: so it 's it 's it 's a little messier , there 's more ways that it can go wrong , but if if if you 're careful with it , it can do better . phd e: and I think to to to recognize the Italian digits with the neural netw Spanish neural network , and also to train another neural network with the Spanish digits , the database of Spanish digits . Was for me , n it was a difficult work last week with the labels because the the program with the label obtained that I have , the Albayzin , is different w to the label to train the neural network . professor f: I 'm sorry , phd e: I 'm sorry , professor f: I have a p I had a problem with the pronunciation . phd e: Oh , also that professor f: So , OK , so let 's start over . professor f: So , TI TIMI TIMIT 's hand - labeled , and and you 're saying about the Spanish ? phd e: The Spanish labels ? That was in different format , that the format for the em the program to train the neural network . Yeah , but n yes , because they have one program , Feacalc , but no , l LabeCut , l LabeCut , but don't doesn't , eh , include the HTK format to convert . I ask e even I ask to Dan Ellis what I can do that , and h they he say me that h he does doesn't any any s any form to to do that . And at the end , I think that with LabeCut I can transfer to ASCII format , and HTK is an ASCII format . And I m do another , one program to put ASCII format of HTK to ase ay ac ASCII format to Exceed professor f:   phd e: Actually that was complicated , professor f: So you phd e: but well , I know how we can did that do that . So it 's just usual kind of  sometimes say housekeeping , right ? To get these get these things sorted out . professor f: So it seems like there 's there 's some peculiarities of the ,  of each of these dimensions that are getting sorted out . And then , if if you work on getting the , assembly lines together , and then the the pieces sort of get ready to go into the assembly line and gradually can start , you know , start turning the crank , more or less . And , we have a lot more computational capability here than they do at OGI , so I think that i if What 's what 's great about this is it sets it up in a very systematic way , so that , once these all of these , you know , mundane but real problems get sorted out , we can just start turning the crank phd e:   professor f: and and push all of us through , and then finally figure out what 's best .  , the first thing was ,  we we actually had thought of this as sort of like ,  not not in stages , but more along the the time axis . grad c: je - je - je - je - je check out the results and and go that way . No , I 'm just saying , I 'm just thinking of it like loops , grad c:  - huh . professor f: right ? And so , y y y if you had three nested loops , that you have a choice for this , a choice for this , and a choice for that , grad c: Yeah . professor f: And , the thing is that once you get a better handle on how much you can realistically do , concurrently on different machines , different SPERTs , and so forth , and you see how long it takes on what machine and so forth , you can stand back from it and say , " OK , if we look at all these combinations we 're talking about , and combinations of combinations , and so forth , " you 'll probably find you can't do it all . professor f: OK , so then at that point , we should sort out which ones do we throw away . professor f: Which of the combinations across you know , what are the most likely ones , and And , I still think we could do a lot of them . But , probably when you include all the combinations , you 're actually talking about a thousand of them or something , and that 's probably more than we can do . And I know that , Stephane 's working from an NT machine , so his his home directory exists somewhere else . We 're over the next year or two , we 're gonna be upgrading the networks in this place , grad c:   So , it actually has reached the point where it 's a significant drag on the time for something to move the data from one place to another . professor f: So , you you don't w especially in something with repetitive computation where you 're going over it multiple times , you do don't want to have the the data that you 're working on distant from where it 's being where the computation 's being done if you can help it . Now , we are getting more disk for the central file server , which , since it 's not a computational server , would seem to be a contradiction to what I just said . But the idea is that , suppose you 're working with , this big bunch of multi multilingual databases . professor f: Then , when you 're working with something and accessing it many times , you copy the piece of it that you 're working with over to some place that 's close to where the computation is and then do all the work there . And then that way you you won't have the the network you won't be clogging the network for yourself and others . So , it 's gonna take us It may be too late for this , p precise crunch we 're in now , but , we 're ,  It 's gonna take us a couple weeks at least to get the , the amount of disk we 're gonna be getting . We 're actually gonna get , I think four more , thirty - six gigabyte drives and , put them on another another disk rack . We ran out of space on the disk rack that we had , so we 're getting another disk rack and four more drives to share between ,  primarily between this project and the Meetings Meetings Project . But , we 've put another I guess there 's another eighteen gigabytes that 's that 's in there now to help us with the immediate crunch . But , are you saying So I don't know where you 're Stephane , where you 're doing your computations . If i so , you 're on an NT machine , so you 're using some external machine phd g: Yeah , it ,  Well , to It 's Nutmeg and Mustard , I think ,  professor f: Do you know these yet ? phd g: I don't know what kind .  , are these are these , computational servers , or something ? I 'm I 've been kind of out of it . professor f: Unfortunately , these days my idea of running comput of computa doing computation is running a spread sheet . Yeah , I 'm not sure what 's available on is it you said Nutmeg and what was the other one ? phd g: Mustard . Yeah , so basically , Chuck will be the one who will be sorting out what disk needs to be where , and so on , and I 'll be the one who says , " OK , spend the money . Which , n these days , if you 're talking about scratch space , it doesn't increase the , need for backup , and , I think it 's not that big a d and the the disks themselves are not that expensive . Right now it 's phd a: What you can do , when you 're on that machine , is , just go to the slash - scratch directory , and do a DF minus K , and it 'll tell you if there 's space available . phd a: and if there is then ,  professor f: But wasn't it ,  I think Dave was saying that he preferred that people didn't put stuff in slash - scratch . It 's more putting in d s XA or XB or , phd a: Well , there 's different there , there 's professor f: right ? phd a: Right . So there 's the slash - X - whatever disks , and then there 's slash - scratch . And if it 's called " slash - scratch " , it means it 's probably an internal disk to the machine . And so that 's the kind of thing where , like if  , OK , if you don't have an NT , but you have a a a Unix workstation , and they attach an external disk , it 'll be called " slash - X - something "  , if it 's not backed up and it 'll be " slash - D - something " if it is backed up . And if it 's inside the machine on the desk , it 's called " slash - scratch " . It 's easy to unhook the external disks , put them back on the new machine , but then your slash - scratch is gone . So , you don't wanna put anything in slash - scratch that you wanna keep around for a long period of time . But if it 's a copy of , say , some data that 's on a server , you can put it on slash - scratch because , first of all it 's not backed up , and second it doesn't matter if that machine disappears and you get a new machine because you just recopy it to slash - scratch . So tha that 's why I was saying you could check slash - scratch on those on on , Mustard and and Nutmeg to see if if there 's space that you could use there . Yeah , and we do have  , yeah , so so you yeah , it 's better to have things local if you 're gonna run over them lots of times so you don't have to go to the network . professor f: Right , so es so especially if you 're right , if you 're if you 're taking some piece of the training corpus , which usually resides in where Chuck is putting it all on the on the , file server , then , yeah , it 's fine if it 's not backed up because if it g g gets wiped out or something , y  it is backed up on the other disk . phd a: Yeah , so , one of the things that I need to I 've started looking at  , is this the appropriate time to talk about the disk space stuff ? professor f: Sure . Dan David , put a new , drive onto Abbott , that 's an X disk , which means it 's not backed up . So , I 've been going through and copying data that is , you know , some kind of corpus stuff usually , that that we 've got on a CD - ROM or something , onto that new disk to free up space on other disks . We haven't deleted them off of the slash - DC disk that they 're on right now in Abbott , but we I would like to go through sit down with you about some of these other ones and see if we can move them onto , this new disk also . So , anything that that you don't need backed up , we can put on this new disk .  , but if it 's experiments and you 're creating files and things that you 're gonna need , you probably wanna have those on a disk that 's backed up , just in case something goes wrong .  So far I 've I 've copied a couple of things , but I haven't deleted anything off of the old disk to make room yet . So I I guess I 'll need to get together with you and see what data we can move onto the new disk . professor f: yeah , I I just an another question occurred to me is is what were you folks planning to do about normalization ? phd g:  . So that this could be another dimension , but we think perhaps we can use the the best , normalization scheme as OGI is using , so , with parameters that they use there ,  professor f: Yeah , I think that 's a good idea . phd g: u u professor f:  it 's i i we we seem to have enough dimensions as it is . professor f: probably the on - line line normalization because then it it 's if we do anything else , we 're gonna end up having to do on - line normalization too , so we may as well just do on - line normalization . So , I guess , yeah , th the other topic I maybe we 're already there , or almost there , is goals for the for next week 's meeting . i i i it seems to me that we wanna do is flush out what you put on the board here . Like a s like a slide ? professor f: so w we can say what we 're doing , grad c: OK . And , also , if you have sorted out , this information about how long i roughly how long it takes to do on what and , you know , what we can how many of these trainings , and testings and so forth that we can realistically do , then one of the big goals of going there next week would be to to actually settle on which of them we 're gonna do . Anything else that I a a Actually started out this this field trip started off with with , Stephane talking to Hynek , so you may have you may have had other goals , for going up , and any anything else you can think of would be we should think about accomplishing ?  , I 'm just saying this because maybe there 's things we need to do in preparation . And  and the other the the last topic I had here was ,  d Dave 's fine offer to to , do something on this .  he 's doing he 's working on other things , but to to do something on this project . So the question is , " Where where could we , most use Dave 's help ? " phd g: yeah , I was thinking perhaps if , additionally to all these experiments , which is not really research , well  it 's , running programs professor f: Yeah . phd g: and , trying to have a closer look at the perhaps the , speech , noise detection or , voiced - sound - unvoiced - sound detection and Which could be important in i for noise noise phd a: I think that would be a I think that 's a big big deal . Because the you know , the thing that Sunil was talking about , with the labels , labeling the database when it got to the noisy stuff ? The That that really throws things off . You know , having the noise all of a sudden , your your , speech detector ,  the the ,  What was it ? What was happening with his thing ? professor f:  phd a: He was running through these models very quickly . professor f: The only problem  , maybe that 's the right thing the only problem I have with it is exactly the same reason why you thought it 'd be a good thing to do . But I think the first responsibility is sort of to figure out if there 's something that , an an additional  , that 's a good thing you remove the mike . professor f: over years , if he 's if he 's interested in , you know , voiced - unvoiced - silence , he could do a lot . But if there if in fact there 's something else that he could be doing , that would help us when we 're we 're sort of  strapped for time We have we we 've , you know , only , another another month or two to you know , with the holidays in the middle of it , to to get a lot done . If we can think of something some piece of this that 's going to be The very fact that it is sort of just work , and i and it 's running programs and so forth , is exactly why it 's possible that it some piece of could be handed to someone to do , because it 's not  , yeah , so that that 's the question . And we don't have to solve it right this s second , but if we could think of some some piece that 's that 's well defined , that he could help with , he 's expressing a will willingness to do that . phd e: Yes , maybe to , mmm , put together the the label the labels between TIMIT and Spanish or something like that . professor f: So what we were just saying is that that ,  I was arguing for , if possible , coming up with something that that really was development and wasn't research because we we 're we have a time crunch . And so , if there 's something that would would save some time that someone else could do on some other piece , then we should think of that first . See the thing with voiced - unvoiced - silence is I really think that that it 's to do to do a a a a poor job is is pretty quick , or , you know , a so - so job . You can you can you can throw in a couple fea we know what what kinds of features help with it . But I remember , in fact , when you were working on that , and you worked on for few months , as I recall , and you got to , say ninety - three percent , and getting to ninety - four really really hard . So ,  And th th the other tricky thing is , since we are , even though we 're not we don't have a strict prohibition on memory size , and and computational complexity , clearly there 's some limitation to it . So if we have to if we say we have to have a pitch detector , say , if we if we 're trying to incorporate pitch information , or at least some kind of harmonic harmonicity , or something , this is another whole thing , take a while to develop .  , one I think one of the a lot of people would say , and I think Dan would also , that one of the things wrong with current speech recognition is that we we really do throw away all the harmonicity information . Reason for doing that is that most of the information about the phonetic identity is in the spectral envelopes are not in the harmonic detail . So wh that so the the other suggestion that just came up was , well what about having him work on the , multilingual super f superset kind of thing .  , coming up with that and then , you know , training it training a net on that , say , from from ,  from TIMIT or something . What what would you what would you think it would wh what would this task consist of ? phd g: Yeah , it would consist in , well , creating the the superset , and , modifying the lab labels for matching the superset . professor f: creating a superset from looking at the multiple languages , phd g: Well , creating the mappings , actually . phd g: Yeah , yeah , with the @ @ three languages , phd e: Maybe for the other language because TIMIT have more phone . grad c: There 's ,  Carmen was talking about this SAMPA thing , and it 's , it 's an effort by linguists to come up with , a machine readable IPA , sort of thing , right ? And , they they have a web site that Stephane was showing us that has ,  has all the English phonemes and their SAMPA correspondent , phoneme , professor f: Yeah . grad c: and then , they have Spanish , they have German , they have all all sorts of languages , mapping mapping to the SAMPA phonemes , which phd e: Yeah , the tr the transcription , though , for Albayzin is n the transcription are of SAMPA the same , how you say , symbol that SAMPA appear . phd b: I was gonna say , does that mean IPA is not really international ? grad c: No , it 's it 's saying phd a: It uses special diacritics and stuff , which you can't do with ASCII characters . professor f: What ,  Has OGI done anything about this issue ? Do they have Do they have any kind of superset that they already have ? phd g: I don't think so . Well , they they they 're going actually the the other way , defining  , phoneme clusters , apparently . phd a: So they just throw the speech from all different languages together , then cluster it into sixty or fifty or whatever clusters ? phd g: I think they 've not done it , doing , multiple language yet , but what they did is to training , English nets with all the phonemes , and then training it in English nets with , kind of seventeen , I think it was seventeen , broad classes . But Hynek didn't add didn't have all the results when he showed me that , so , well . phd g: But professor f: Is there 's some way that we should tie into that with this . Right ?  , if if in fact that is a better thing to do , should we leverage that , rather than doing , our own . Right ? So , if i if if they s  , we have i we have the the trainings with our own categories . And now we 're saying , " Well , how do we handle cross - language ? " And one way is to come up with a superset , but they are als they 're trying coming up with clustered , and do we think there 's something wrong with that ? phd g: I think that there 's something wrong professor f: OK . What w phd g: or Well , because Well , for the moment we are testing on digits , and e i perhaps u using broad phoneme classes , it 's it 's OK for  ,  classifying the digits , but as soon as you will have more words , well , words can differ with only a single phoneme , and which could be the same , class . Although , you are not using this for the phd g: So , I 'm professor f: You 're using this for the feature generation , though , not the phd g: Yeah , but you will ask the net to put one for th th the phoneme class professor f: Yeah . phd a: So you 're saying that there may not be enough information coming out of the net to help you discriminate the words ? professor f: Yeah . phd b: Fact , most confusions are within the phone phone classes , right ? I think , Larry was saying like obstruents are only confused with other obstruents , et cetera , et cetera . grad c: So so , maybe we could look at articulatory type stuff , professor f: But that 's what I thought they were gonna grad c: right ? professor f: Did they not do that , or ? phd g: I don't think so . Well , professor f: So phd g: they were talking about , perhaps , but they d professor f: They 're talking about it , phd g: I d professor f: but that 's sort of a question whether they did phd g: w Yeah . professor f: Instead of the the the the superclass thing , which is to take So suppose y you don't really mark arti To really mark articulatory features , you really wanna look at the acoustics and and see where everything is , and we 're not gonna do that . So , the second class way of doing it is to look at the , phones that are labeled and translate them into acoustic  ,  articulatory , features . You won't really have these overlapping things and so forth , phd a: So the targets of the net are these ? professor f: but phd a: Articulatory features . phd a: But that implies that you can have more than one on at a time ? professor f: Right . And ,  I don't know if our software this if the qu versions of the Quicknet that we 're using allows for that . Do you know ? grad c: Allows for ? professor f: Multiple targets being one ? grad c: Oh , we have gotten soft targets to to work . professor f: is that we could we could , just translate instead of translating to a superset , just translate to articulatory features , some set of articulatory features and train with that . Now the fact even though it 's a smaller number , it 's still fine because you have the the , combinations . So , in fact , it has every , you know it had has has every distinction in it that you would have the other way . We could I don't know , if you had  the phone labels , you could replace them by their articulatory features and then feed in a vector with those  , things turned on based on what they 're supposed to be for each phone to see if it if you get a big win . phd a: So , if your net is gonna be outputting , a vector of basically of well , it 's gonna have probabilities , but let 's say that they were ones and zeros , then y and you know for each , I don't know if you know this for your testing data , but if you know for your test data , you know , what the string of phones is and and you have them aligned , then you can just instead of going through the net , just create the vector for each phone and feed that in to see if that data helps . Eh , eh , what made me think about this is , I was talking with Hynek and he said that there was a guy at A T - andT who spent eighteen months working on a single feature . And because they had done some cheating experiments professor f: This was the guy that we were just talking a that we saw on campus . phd a: Well , Hynek said that that , I guess before they had him work on this , they had done some experiment where if they could get that one feature right , it dramatically improved the result . phd a: So I was thinking , you know it made me think about this , that if it 'd be an interesting experiment just to see , you know , if you did get all of those right . So that 's that 's equivalent to saying that you 've got got all the phones right . professor f: Although , yeah , it would be make an interesting cheating experiment because we are using it in this funny way , phd a: Yeah . phd a: And then you also don't know what error they 've got on the HTK side . phd b: The soft training of the nets still requires the vector to sum to one , though , right ? grad c: To sum up to one . phd b: So you can't really feed it , like , two articulatory features that are on at the same time with ones cuz it 'll kind of normalize them down to one half or something like that , for instance . Is it always softmax grad c: it 's sig No , it 's actually sigmoid - X phd g: or ? Yeah . grad c: for the phd g: So if you choose sigmoid it 's o it 's OK ? grad c: You ,  professor f: Did we just run out of disk , grad c: I think I think apparently , the ,  professor f: or ? phd b: Why don't you just choose linear ? Right ? grad c: What 's that ? phd b: Linear outputs ? grad c: Linear outputs ? phd b: Isn't that what you 'll want ? grad c:  . Right , but during the training , we would train on sigmoid - X phd b: Oh , you Yeah ? grad c: and then at the end just chop off the final nonlinearity . professor f: So , we 're we 're we 're off the air , or ? About to be off the air .
marketing: What's the agenda for this meeting ? project manager: The I will  present here agenda with with with with slides to you . I've also made notes of the previous meeting and  I was about to send them you but then  I had to go to this  meeting so you will get them too  marketing: project manager: Then I hope you all have  worked out some some  some some presentations about  about well you the the task given to you in the previous meeting .  then I will  bring in some some some new requirements I I got  from the  account manager , I try to work them out , they were quite abstract , and we can have maybe have com some discussion about it . project manager: and Well in this meeting we should really try to reach a decision about the target group and the functionality of the marketing:  . industrial designer: You mean the social target group who we wants to target ? project manager: Yes  well yes w who are we going to  to well to sell this , marketing:  . So And then  we will close this meeting  user interface: project manager: and after this meeting we'll  we'll have a lunch . Maybe  why  Anna can you c do you have a presentations ? marketing: No , I don't . project manager:  you want a table to to  marketing: I c I can talk about it but I have no slides or anything . project manager: Yes yes maybe maybe you can  can just talk about it or maybe you can use the whiteboard if necessary  . Well I've just been  presented with some research we've done in a small focus group so , a hundred people , just asked them about their remote control usage habits and what they want in a remote control . It's probably can't email this to you , I've just got a web page with some data on it .  seventy five percent of users said they zap a lot , so they use their remote control quite frequently while they're watching television . Fifty percent of users say that they only use ten percent of the buttons , so they've got a remote control with a lot of functionality but really most of the time they only use a small part of that . project manager: Do you Do you have this  information on the web page you said ? marketing: I have an a web page yes . So basically  there's a breakdown of how much they use the different functions on a rem remote control .  , channel selection is used a hundred and sixty eight times  and then there's things like channel settings , audio settings , which are only used very infrequently . Teletext is used  fourteen times in the hour , so it is used but not nearly as much as the channel selection is used . marketing: An interesting thing that this report has brought up is that  fifty fifty percent of users report that the remote control gets lost a lot of the time in the room , so some way of some way of locating the remote control would be very useful to a lot of users . industrial designer: marketing: Thirty four percent said it takes too long to learn to use a remote control , they want something that's easier to use straight away , more intuitive perhaps . industrial designer: It's it's easy to learn or how do you say it's marketing: Thirty four percent said it took too much time to learn to use a new one . industrial designer: Not enough marketing: I don't know how we'd go about combating that . What do you mean there ? marketing: For R_S_I_ ? Respet Repetitive strain injury . project manager: But it's it's the opinion of the  of the users huh ? marketing: Yeah . marketing:  and then it's got a demographic breakdown on industrial designer: Maybe y y you cannot put this webpage online on the marketing:  I should be able to actually , if I email it to you now . user interface: You can disconnect it there project manager: You can maybe just just user interface: no ? marketing: Oh no , yeah . industrial designer: Ah it's it okay it's a webpage on the C_ it's a file marketing: Yeah . industrial designer: So these are important numbers that Matthew and I need to take into account for our functional  user interface: Oh yeah . It's probably easier if you put it on yours and then I'll just email it to you . industrial designer: Yeah these numbers have have to be have to be taken into account for the  both yeah user interface and functional design . marketing: One thing it goes on to talk about , which is interesting , is the hang on a minute . industrial designer: Because if there are many numbers and we need to select to to constraint  our design based on what is more important . industrial designer: Speech recognition in marketing: And who would pay more for that and whether people would find it useful . industrial designer: So that we don't Do we not need any button on the remote control marketing: Well potentially yeah ,  project manager: user interface: industrial designer: it would be all based on speech . project manager: Well it would it would be a solution for  when your remote control is lost , marketing: project manager:  when it has speech recognition then  i then it doesn't matter where it is , my well it's we should be in range , industrial designer: Yeah . project manager: I'm not sure whether we will we can make this for for twelve Euro fi and fifty cents . industrial designer: And we don't know where the state of the art of speech recognition is , maybe you know ? user interface: Oh . Well , it depends you know like there is  it's a very small vocabulary that you want to do the operations like you want to say on , off , one , two , twenty three , project manager:  . project manager: Yes , user interface: It's it's going to be li project manager: that that that that's  . user interface: it's not going to be s so easy but u usually it's going to be more of an isolated case project manager: Do you have some more important facts user interface: but it's but I don't know with twenty fi marketing:  project manager: or can we go to the next presentation ? industrial designer: Okay . So marketing: Well industrial designer: you had to to to summarise maybe the marketing: This is now talking about  who would pay for speech recognition in a remote control , who would pay more for it ,  . Ninety percent of the fifteen to twenty five year old market said that they would pay more , it goes down from there , seventy six percent for twenty five to thirty five , thirty five percent for thirty five to forty five ,  twenty two percent for forty five to fifty five and then eight percent for fifty five to sixty five . marketing: Yeah , it really depends where we're gonna be targeting this product , user interface: project manager:  . industrial designer: I thi You us marketing: It'll be in a different window , yep . marketing: Another thing it's talking about there is the L_C_D_ screen but there's no figures apparently on that .  I okay project manager: Oh , industrial designer: I stay project manager: this is user interface: Now you can move I think yeah . user interface: It's a channel selection , a module , this and this function , marketing: Sorry ? Oh .  I'd like first to give a quick a very simple introduction , how does it work , so that everybody knows even if you don't have a very  technical background  what is it because I think in the product it is important . industrial designer: So basically  the basic function of a remote control is to send  messages to another system that is fixed . industrial designer: And so an energy source feeds an integrated circuit , the chip , that can compose messages , usually  through a  infrared bit marketing: So my method for  designing the yeah the work design  yeah first the the main point is that I would wish to to make a really functional product . I would prefer to have very functional  capabilities rather than fancy stuff that in fact is not used and doesn't work . industrial designer: So for that yeah as it's important to take into account the user requirements from the Marketing  Expert  Anna marketing: industrial designer: and  w to to we should agree on what are the technical functions  for this remote control and I show you the the working design .  we want an on off button , it can be  it's simple but it's it's important , and also  the to both channels as well as other buttons that come after , marketing:  . So the components I quickly draw here , is that in this part you have the remote control the the sender and on the other part the receiver so that's my method is  will be to well my aim would be to  design the and choose the chips and the infrared  components to build the remote control marketing: This is very quick  design ,  you stop me or interrupt me if  you don't agree on it on that . industrial designer: And  so what I have found and after a lot of work actually I I draw this I draw for you this  schema marketing: Well . industrial designer: that can be maybe too technical for you but is very important for me marketing: You drew it a long time ago ? industrial designer: you know . industrial designer: And  that's it so I won't go into details about that project manager: overwhelming . So project manager: are they cheap , or are they  reliable ? What were your industrial designer: found and yeah th you have always a compromise with  reliability and  i if it's expensive , project manager:  . industrial designer: but  this one was not this one also really  reliable  so yeah that's it for the working design ,  I hope you get clearer view on  what what a remote control is  in terms of  technical components project manager: Yes . industrial designer: but maybe yeah project manager: So user interface: But is it  can you just buy it on the market and f plug it in or you want to ma industrial designer: No no no no we we will  This is a preference but we can always change  project manager: What I w what I was thinking about  the the the schema  about  the sender and the receiver ,  can you can you get back to it ? industrial designer: Yeah . project manager: Yeah  , the receiver is of course already in the television and we are not  able to change it . We will use  infrared protocol  using yeah infrared and  and of course we need to adapt to that protocol that already exists project manager: industrial designer: and but we what we can do is   adapting the the chips inside  to the best  chips and  infrared bubbles . Of course yeah user interface: But you should be careful , industrial designer: in the chip you have it yeah . user interface: people are sometime becoming problem , like a guy has recently designed a remote    which could switch off any other T_V_s , so basically through all the things . user interface: So maybe we should think of marketing: industrial designer: Of course yeah we should take that into account marketing: That's handy . project manager: Yeah yes marketing: So if the b T_V_ in the next apartment's really loud , you can just turn it off . industrial designer: in the  user interface: Yeah so you can just go on the street and then switch off everyone's T_V_ and you can just walk away industrial designer: user interface: You don't have to be near the T_V_ at all . project manager: I I feel I I I think M Mael will will consider this  th these things . So  I'm going to talk a little bit about the technical function so wha what actually it's about what is the user going to do , I think my last presented what is going inside , marketing: user interface: so what's the user is going to see from the outside and how he is going to use it . So well the approach is that  basically the idea is to send a message to the T_V_ set , as Mael has pointed , and it will be decoded by the T_V_ and usually we it is easier to have  keys or buttons with which people can  press and then  changing a button will basically  change the message which is being sent to the T_V_ and   industrial designer: So p as  Anna has said that this ki people are interested in things which are you don't need to k press the keys , people are can have a speech recognition but this is  s a question which will we have to see later . user interface: But in the present scenario is that you have certain keys and you press it like your mobile phone , and it sends a message to the T_V_ . user interface: And  so generally  I don't have some figures sorry but  so there are two kinds of  remote if you popularly in the household , actually so you have a standard T_V_ remote where you have just a on , off button and play ,  volume change and  keys for the number and more than one digit option . And if you see for example righ right now   even the one  on more than one digit option is for two digit channel which is like ninety nine , but tomorrow you might have one fifty channels you know to browse or two hundred channels to browse who knows , but   . Then there is  this is the standard one with without any fancy thing you know like i it doesn't have teletext option , it can without any , it's a very simple thing ,  which which you can vouch . And then you have  what's the v video remote file which is like usually it has almost all the keys over there and , but it then it has other options like stop  and then you play the movie or  or fo fast forward the movie or something like that so i it has those marketing: And then well personal preferences I would  basically think of having a kind of aim for the next generation thing where the we could have both the  the f a T_V_ and the remote video remote control because  some of the keys in the video's remote control and the T_V_ they could be integrated together so that  we could  aim for the like in the f coming future  that type of  applications with marketing: Okay . How would that work ? So you've got say maybe a V_C_R_ and a T_V_ which are separate , user interface: marketing: so you on my one at home I've got a V_C_R_ remote which then changes the channel on the V_C_R_ and doesn't do anything on the T_V_ , user interface: Yeah . marketing: so is it gonna be like a switch on the remote that says t use the T_V_ or use the V_C_R_ ? user interface: Yeah . marketing: or does it know which one you want to use ? user interface:  actually  you could you could think of  having s a y you can have a key which could tell y it could go to the video thing marketing: user interface: but   yo you you you still can't  in that case when it you use that the function should be able to take up the V_C_R_ option marketing: user interface: and you could play it or You can also think about having like  I in a few days you will be ha in in few ye coming years you might even have a system where you have a separate  sitting setup box marketing: user interface: and  you have   something like   you do you do you suppose you are not able to watch some programme and actually it downloading all the time for you marketing: user interface: and  you can just you know  when you come back you could just switch on that thing and  watch a program . user interface: In that case you want to browse faster , browse slow , you want to have those kind of functionalities . user interface: It's the next generation thing , project manager:  yes , user interface: but it is going to come in couple of years . project manager: but I think it's i i it's already there , user interface: It's goi project manager:  the hard disk  recorders  I I've seen them in the shop . user interface: it's going to record your things and you and you you need basically the functionalities what you need in both   video as well as in the standard T_V_ thing . That's , user interface: No no we are not making a universal remote , marketing: yeah . user interface: we are just looking at  giving a scenario , I have a T_V_ and tomorrow I am going to have set up box marketing:  . user interface: which is going to sit there and  it's going to do that job for me . Because y project manager: W w w w we need to decide on on on on in how far we go to in this . project manager: Mean , you can go pretty far I f I think with with with functions and possible  future p  prospects marketing:  . So we can always discuss about it for example  the presently the video market actually  this demand , video over-demand or what we call it as , it's presently booming up actually industrial designer: user interface: so it i like people are providing like  things like   movies , you can select actually so you want to watch a movie and  your p your provider gives a list of movies , and then you select those list . user interface: and then when you come you want to loo watch it on your T_V_ . industrial designer: Or even you don't need to download it , it's streamed  online  yeah . user interface: Yeah it can be streamed online for you and you can say what time I want to watch the movie marketing:  . project manager: I have  received some some some some well points of of thinking over of my account manager and  I would like to share them with you . project manager: first thing is  teletext is a well known feature of televisions marketing: Do we include it , and do we give it a prominent  prominent  place on on on the on well huh on the remote mot control itself . project manager:  as  a in any case it's it's not used , well very much , but it's it is still used . project manager: further yes we must think ,  do we stay  to to television only , the television as we as we all know it with with broadcasting signals and you can't go back  huh , or do we   go further as Matthew indicated by supporting   recording  devices ? user interface: marketing: So D_V_D_s and V_C_R_s ? project manager:  indeed indeed .  , furthermore , w we need really need to interest  y younger customers and then with younger customers  people  below the age of forty , marketing: project manager: So industrial designer: So project manager: that's to that's  there's a market but  they will grow older older marketing: project manager: and you'll al always need to have the the future with younger people . project manager:  therefore , younger people like trendy trendy designs , so that's w we should make our our our R_C_ as trendy as possible but it should also be  have a reliable image , so when it looks too too spacey or too fancy people will think well does it work at all . user interface: Yeah it's  well you you can follow the ideas how you want to keep the keys , you know right now if you take it you have like zero , one , two , three like a keys separately , marketing: user interface: but suppose if you take the the present trend of mobile phones there are like big thick keys marketing:  . user interface: you press on the top , it takes one number , you press on the bottom it takes another number , and  basically   so the space covered so that you don't see two separate keys there actually industrial designer: But I think taking the idea of getting inspiration from mobile phones is interesting , especially if we're going after a younger market , user interface: Yeah so . Yes yes marketing: that's the the the  the new and the funky things , project manager: mo industrial designer: Because they are already used to that , you know , product . marketing: that's , project manager: Yes it's recognisable industrial designer: Yeah . marketing: yeah , there's lot there's lots of pretty mobile phones , not too many pretty remote controls . So , for example you have  presently  keys like one , two , three like this , actually , and   four five six like that and  you can have keys like this in form like  keys like that project manager: Mael can you hand me over this  ? industrial designer: Yes . How much longer have we got for the meeting by the way ? project manager:  well marketing: 'Cause we haven't talked about demographic at all project manager: I think fi five min user interface: Forty minutes ? marketing: and it's a very important issue . too sorry , so we basically don't change the  original order of them industrial designer: user interface: but then the keys are more spacious , marketing: user interface: they don't look  so there there is a very sligh thing , so if you press on the top it takes the one , it takes the three ,  four , sorry four here  five and six , marketing:  . user interface: so the keys can be it looks you know not very much cluttered but it looks nice industrial designer: user interface: but you can have a lot of options t if you press on the to project manager: Okay . industrial designer: marketing: basically we're trying to get people to buy a remote control user interface: Yeah . marketing: wouldn't they already have a remote control with their television when they buy one ? user interface: project manager: Of course they have already one . marketing: 'cause it's only a low market , it's a cheap-end remote control , we can't beat modern functionality , we might we'll be able to beat them on th the look of it , th the design of it but that's not a big seller , if they're not just going to buy a new remote control just 'cause it looks pretty , they have to actually need it as well . I well I think many people said  in your in in your research    the appearance of the  R_C_ is is important when they are buying one marketing:  . I've got friends who've got so many things they need a universal remote , otherwise they're using five different remotes for their all their things . marketing: In that case they wouldn't buy our product , because it doesn't give them what they need in terms of functionality . project manager: So your you think we should go for a more u universal high-performance marketing: Well , we can't , with the price range . project manager: What do What do you think about What componen industrial designer: Yeah we have yeah twelve point five Euros  per  per R_ s R_C_ marketing:  . industrial designer: and I think  with this now you know that chips are very  cheaps marketing: If we're getting into universal remote territory , we're getting to L_C_D_ screens and things like that industrial designer: that's marketing: which would drive the cost up a lot . industrial designer: Ye project manager: Is the L_C_D_ screen marketing: For universal remotes industrial designer: I don't think L_C_D_ is not necessary well , th for long term . project manager: I think thi this could be this could be a market because  universal remote controls  tend to be  quite expensive . marketing: And quite complicated to use , project manager: S so we can try to go in between , marketing: yes . project manager: but but still but still people have the idea this is more functional than a normal   R_C_ industrial designer: Universal . project manager: marketing: But if we're going for the say fifteen to twenty five age group then not many of them would actually own T_V_s to use a remote control on . project manager:  yes but w we're targeting I think on more on the on the twenty to forty group . Who just have or already have a job and have the money but may not want to spend that much money on a on a universal universal control . Are we gonna be at the very bottom of the price range , or are we kind of middle to bottom ? I don't know . project manager: I think  when we think it over I thi I think we are trying to offer the a kind of universal control for for less money . project manager: So d Do you agree ? user interface: Well Well I it's fine with me like the price as long as it is  not too expensive . industrial designer: Yeah user interface:  and it d  Our provin industrial designer: because we have to take into account that we are gonna b we are gonna sell  four aro around four million so when we speak about these numbers  the price of a chip is  price of a chip is very cheap . industrial designer: So I'm okay for designing  a ne  less yeah a a kind of universal  R_C_ yeah . And  basically you can look to the standards of other industrial designer: Yeah that's needed , yeah . So I guess what I'd like from a universal remote is maybe choosing between three devices , being able to switch between them , there may be stereo , V_C_R_ and T_V_ . marketing: And just be able to s use them all from the same remote , but not at the same time . user interface: Yeah you can also browse through all the standards you know , where are the limit of standards for all of them and you can just browse through them . project manager: So given we are going for this   universal type  m maybe it is good when you try to find out which components you therefore need and y you will try to get more specific  user interface content industrial designer: Yes . project manager: and  maybe you can look on on what trends are in this  in this type of market . user interface: and we'll I'm sure we'll up something good marketing: project manager: W yes , user interface: for the project manager: we  we can have lunch now . project manager: So  Then th th the next meeting will  user interface: Yeah so we meet in well what are our project manager: after lunch you have  we have  thirty minutes of work and then we have the next meeting
grad b: We didn't crash we 're not crashing anymore phd c: One , two , three , four , f grad b: and it really bothers me . phd c: Yeah ? professor a: Oh ! Well maybe it 's just , you know , how many t u u u u how many times you crash in a day . phd g: Or maybe it 's once you 've done enough meetings it won't crash on you anymore . professor a: Do we have an agenda ? Liz Liz and Andreas can't sh can't  , can't come . phd g: Did they send , the messages to you about the meeting today ? grad b: I have no idea but I just got it a few minutes ago . grad b: So , does anyone have any a agenda items other than me ? I actually have one more also which is to talk about the digits . professor a: right , so so I I was just gonna talk briefly about the NSF ITR . professor a: and then , you have postdoc f: Can w professor a: I won't say much , but  , but then , you said wanna talk about digits ? grad b: I have a short thing about digits and then  I wanna talk a little bit about naming conventions , although it 's unclear whether this is the right place to talk about it . So maybe just talk about it very briefly and take the details to the people who for whom it 's relevant . I 've been but but  , well professor a: Well if we Yeah , we shouldn't add things in just to add things in . grad b: So the only thing I wanna say about digits is , we are pretty much done with the first test set . There are probably forms here and there that are marked as having been read that weren't really read . So I won't really know until I go through all the transcriber forms and extract out pieces that are in error . The first is what should we do about digits that were misread ? My opinion is , we should just throw them out completely , and have them read again by someone else . grad b: so it it 's perfectly fine to put a a group together again of errors and have them re - read , just to finish out the test set . postdoc f: Oh ! By throw them out completely ? grad b: the other thing you could do is change the transcript to match what they really said . I know I 've done it , where I say say a grad b: What the transcribers did with that is if they did a correction , and they eventually did read the right string , you extract the right string . phd g: Oh , you 're talking about where they completely read the wrong string and didn't correct it ? phd e: Yeah . grad b: So so postdoc f: Well , and s and you 're talking string - wise , you 're not talking about the entire page ? grad b: Correct . grad b: And so the the two options are change the transcript to match what they really said , but then but then the transcript isn't the Aurora test set anymore . phd g: Well how many are how how often does that happen ? grad b: Mmm , five or six times . professor a: Yeah , it 's five or six times out of thousands ? phd c: Yeah . phd g: Yeah , it 's professor a: Yeah , I would , tak do the easy way , phd g: Yeah . professor a: It it 's kinda nice  , wh who knows what studies people will be doing on on speaker - dependent things phd c: Mmm . phd g: So you  , how many digits have been transcribed now ? grad b: Four thousand lines . phd g: Four thousand lines ? grad b: I didn't I didn't compute the average . grad b: And , Jane , I do have a set of forms which I think you have copies of somewhere . grad b: Yeah , I was just wond I thought I had had all of them back from you . And then the other thing is that , the forms in front of us here that we 're gonna read later , were suggested by Liz postdoc f: No , not yet . And so , I just wanted people to , take a quick look at the instructions phd c:   grad b: and the way it wa worked and see if it makes sense and if anyone has any comments on it . Although we could switch it back and tell them always to say " zero " or always to say " O " . professor a: that 's the only thought I have because if you t start talking about these , you know u tr She 's trying to get at natural groupings , but it there 's there 's nothing natural about reading numbers this way . grad b: But , the other problem we were thinking about is if you just put the numerals , they might say forty - three instead of four three .  , you can With when you space them out they don't look like , forty - three anymore . grad b: and she felt that it 's very , very natural to do that sort of chunking .  it 's a it 's a it 's an interesting problem  , we 've done stuff with numbers before , and yeah sometimes people If you say s " three nine eight one " sometimes people will say " thirty - nine eighty - one " or " three hundred three hundred eighty - nine one " , or I don't think they 'd say that , phd c: Yeah . professor a: but but th grad b: Not very frequently professor a: no grad b: but , they certainly could . grad b: and , since this was something that Liz asked for specifically , I think we need to defer to her . Well , we 're probably gonna be collecting meetings for a while and if we decide we still wanna do some digits later we might be able to do some different ver different versions , grad b: Do something different , professor a: but this is the next suggestion , grad b: yeah . OK , so  e l I guess , let me , get my my short thing out about the NSF .  , I I sent to what I thought we had , in some previous mail , as the right joint thing to send to , which was " M MTG RCDR hyphen joint " . professor a: But then I got some sort of funny mail saying that the moderator was going to grad b: It 's That 's because they set the one up at UW postdoc f:  grad b: that 's not on our side , that 's on the U - dub side . grad b: And , I have no idea whether it actually ever goes to anyone so you might just wanna mail to Mari professor a: No no , th I got I got , little excited notes from Mari and Jeff and so on , grad b: and professor a: so it 's grad b: OK , good . grad b: Cuz I had sent one earlier Actually the same thing happened to me I had sent one earlier . The message says , " You 'll be informed " and then I was never informed but I got replies from people indicating that they had gotten it , so . Well , anyway , I guess everybody here Are y are you are on that list , right ? So you got the note ? phd g:   professor a: so this was , a , proposal that we put in before on on more more higher level , issues in meetings , from I guess higher level from my point of view .  , and , meeting mappings , and ,  so is i for it was a proposal for the ITR program , Information Technology Research program 's part of National Science Foundation . They 're they 're a lot of them are some of them anyway , are larger larger grants than the usual , small NSF grants , and . So , they 're very competitive , and they have a first phase where you put in pre - proposals , and we we , got through that . grad b: When 's when 's the full proposal due ? professor a: I think April ninth , or something . And they said end of business day you could check on the reviewer forms , phd g: u grad b: is that phd g: Tomorrow . grad b: I guess that 's a good thing cuz that way I got my papers done early . phd g: It would be interesting professor a: So that 's amazing you showed up at this meeting ! grad b: It is . My favorite is was when when when one reviewer says , " you know , this should be far more detailed " , and the nex the next reviewer says , " you know , there 's way too much detail " . Or " this is way too general " , and the other reviewer says , " this is way too specific " . Is that right ? That they didn't reject a lot of the pre - proposals ? professor a: Do you know anything about the numbers ? grad b: No . phd g: Gary Strong 's professor a: I phd g: there was a sentence at the end of one of his paragraphs phd e: Yeah . He said the next phase 'll be very , competitive phd e: Very very , phd g: because we didn't want to weed out much in the first phase . professor a: So , you know , maybe they didn't r weed out as much as usual , but it 's it 's usually a pretty But it Yeah . It 's it 's certainly not I 'm sure that it 's not down to one in two or something of what 's left . professor a: I 'm sure it 's , you know grad b: How how many awards are there , do you know ? professor a: Well there 's different numbers of w awards for different size They have three size grants . This one there 's ,  See the small ones are less than five hundred thousand total over three years and that they have a fair number of them .  , and the large ones are , boy , I forget , I think , more than , more than a million and a half , more than two million or something like that . But , I don't remember , but it 's pr probably along the li I I could be wrong on this yeah , but probably along the lines of fifteen or that they 'll fund , or twenty .  when they Do you do you know how many they funded when they f in in Chuck 's , that he got last year ? phd g: I don't I don't know . grad b: I thought it was smaller , that it was like four or five , wasn't it ? professor a: Well they fund phd g: I I 'm professor a: they phd g: I don't remember . professor a: and this time they came up with a middle one , so it 'll there 'll be more of them that they fund than of the big . phd g: If we end up getting this , what will it mean to ICSI in terms of , w wh where will the money go to , what would we be doing with it ? professor a:  . professor a: You know , it i None of it will go for those yachts that we 've talking about . phd g:  Dang ! professor a: well , no ,  it 's u It phd g: It 's just for the research to continue the research on the Meeting Recorder stuff ? professor a: It 's extending the research , right ? Because the other phd g: Yeah . grad b: Yeah it 's go higher level stuff than we 've been talking about for Meeting Recorder . Yeah the other things that we have , been working on with , the c with Communicator  , especially with the newer things with the more acoustically - oriented things are are are are lower level . And , this is dealing with , mapping on the level of of , the conversation of mapping the conversations phd g:   So it 's all it 's all stuff that none none of us are doing right now , or none of us are funded for , so it 's so it 's it would be new . phd g: So assuming everybody 's completely busy now , it means we 're gonna hafta , hire more students , or , something ? professor a: Well there 's evenings , and there 's weekends , and  . Yeah , there there would be there would be new hires , and and there there would be expansion , but , also , there 's always for everybody there 's there 's always things that are dropping off , grants that are ending , or other things that are ending , so , phd g: Right . professor a: But but there definitely would be new new new , students , phd g: I see . grad b: Are there any students in your class who are expressing interest ? professor a: not clear yet . professor a:  we got we have yeah , two of them are two in the c There 're two in the class already here , and then and and , then there 's a third who 's doing a project here , who ,  But he he he won't be in the country that long , grad b:   professor a: Actually there is one other guy who 's looking that that 's that guy , Jeremy ? I think .  professor a: Anyway , yeah that 's that 's all I was gonna say is that that that 's you know , that 's nice and we 're sorta preceding to the next step , and , it 'll mean some more work , you know , in in March in getting the proposal out , and then , it 's , you know We 'll see what happens . It just ,  we 've been cutting up sound files , in for ba both digits and for , doing recognition . And Liz had some suggestions on naming and it just brought up the whole issue that hasn't really been resolved about naming . So , one thing she would like to have is for all the names to be the same length so that sorting is easier . grad b: same number of characters so that when you 're sorting filenames you can easily extract out bits and pieces that you want . And I don't think we have so many meetings that that 's a big deal just to change the names . So that means , instead of calling it " MR one " , " MR two " , you 'd call it " MRM zero zero one " , " MRM zero zero two " , things like that . postdoc f: But , you know , when you , do things like that you can always as long as you have  , you can always search from the beginning or the end of the string . postdoc f: You know , so " zero zero two " grad b: Alright , postdoc f: Yeah . grad b: so we we have th we 're gonna have the speaker ID , the session , information on the microphones , postdoc f: Yeah , well , your example was really grad b: information on the speak on the channels and all that . postdoc f: i grad b: And so if each one of those is a fixed length , the sorting becomes a lot easier . So like , the NSA meeting lengths , all filenames are gonna be the same length as the Meeting Recorder meeting names ? grad b: Yep . And as I said , the it 's we just don't have that many that that 's a big deal . grad b: And so , at some point we have to sort of take a few days off , let the transcribers have a few days off , make sure no one 's touching the data and reorganize the file structures . postdoc f: I I would think though that the transcribe the transcripts themselves wouldn't need to have such lengthy names . postdoc f: So , you 're dealing with a different domain there , and with start and end times and all that , and channels and stuff , grad b: Right . So the only thing that would change with that is just the directory names , postdoc f: so , it 's a different set . grad b: So for for m the meetings we were thinking about three letters and three numbers for meeting I Ds .  , for speakers , M or F and then three numbers , For ,  and , that also brings up the point that we have to start assembling a speaker database so that we get those links back and forth and keep it consistent . We want some way of specifying , more than looking in the " key " file , what channel and what mike . grad b: that 's gonna become especially important once we start changing the microphone set - up . We have some new microphones that I 'd like to start trying out , once I test them . professor a: since we have such a short agenda list I guess I wi I will ask how how are the transcriptions going ? Yeah . postdoc f: The the news is that I 've I  s So in s  So I 've switched to Start my new sentence . I I switched to doing the channel - by - channel transcriptions to provide , the  , tighter time bins for partly for use in Thilo 's work and also it 's of relevance to other people in the project . And , I discovered in the process a couple of of interesting things , which , one of them is that , it seems that there are time lags involved in doing this , using an interface that has so much more complexity to it . And I and I wanted to maybe ask , Chuck to help me with some of the questions of efficiency . Maybe I was thinking maybe the best way to do this in the long run may be to give them single channel parts and then piece them together later .  , so it 's like , I I know that I can take them apart and put them together and I 'll end up with the representation which is where the real power of that interface is . postdoc f: And it may be that it 's faster to transcribe a channel at a time with only one , sound file and one , set of of , utterances to check through . I thought that that one of the reason we thought we were so much faster than than , the the other transcription , thing was that that we were using the mixed file . But , with the mixed , when you have an overlap , you only have a a choice of one start and end time for that entire overlap , which means that you 're not tightly , tuning the individual parts th of that overlap by different speakers . postdoc f: So someone may have only said two words in that entire big chunk of overlap . postdoc f: And for purposes of of , things like well , so things like training the speech - nonspeech segmentation thing . postdoc f: And w and w and , you know , is a It would be wonderful if , it 's possible then to use that algorithm to more tightly tie in all the channels after that but , you know , I 've th the So , I I don't know exactly where that 's going at this point . But m I was experimenting with doing this by hand and I really do think that it 's wise that we 've had them start the way we have with , m y working off the mixed signal , having the interface that doesn't require them to do the ti  , the time bins for every single channel at a t  , through the entire interaction . postdoc f: I did discover a couple other things by doing this though , and one of them is that , once in a while a backchannel will be overlooked by the transcriber . postdoc f: because when it 's a b backchannel could well happen in a very densely populated overlap . And if we 're gonna study types of overlaps , which is what I wanna do , an analysis of that , then that really does require listening to every single channel all the way through the entire length for all the different speakers . Now , for only four speakers , that 's not gonna be too much time , but if it 's nine speakers , then that i that is more time . So it 's li you know , kind of wondering And I think again it 's like this it 's really valuable that Thilo 's working on the speech - nonspeech segmentation because maybe , we can close in on that wi without having to actually go to the time that it would take to listen to every single channel from start to finish through every single meeting .  especially if they 're really short and they 're not very loud and so it it can it it will always happen that also the automatic s detection system will miss some of them , so . Well so then then , maybe the answer is to , listen especially densely in places of overlap , phd e: Yeah . postdoc f: just so that they 're they 're not being overlooked because of that , and count on accuracy during the sparser phases . postdoc f: Cuz there are large s spaces of the That 's a good point . I I think it 's really interesting data to work with , I have to say , it 's very enjoyable .  , you 're you 're you 're still in the midst of what you 're doing from what you described last time , I assume , phd c: Is true . postdoc f:  professor a: and phd c: I haven't results , eh , yet professor a: Yeah . phd c: but , eh , I I 'm continue working with the mixed signal now , after the the last experience . phd c: And and I 'm tried to to , adjust the to to improve , eh , an harmonicity , eh , detector that , eh , I I implement . phd c: But I have problem because , eh , I get , eh , eh , very much harmonics now . phd c: harmonic possi possible harmonics , eh , and now I 'm I 'm I 'm trying to to find , eh , some kind of a ,  of h of help , eh , using the energy to to distinguish between possible harmonics , and and other fre frequency peaks , that , eh , corres not harmonics . And , eh , I have to to talk with y with you , with the group , eh , about the instantaneous frequency , because I have , eh , an algorithm , and , I get , mmm , eh , t t results similar results , like , eh , the paper , eh , that I I am following . But , eh , the the rules , eh , that , eh , people used in the paper to to distinguish the harmonics , is doesn't work well . phd c: And I I I I not sure that i eh , the the way o to ob the way to obtain the the instantaneous frequency is right , or it 's it 's not right . If if if ,  If I don't have enough time and y you wanna discuss with someone else some someone else besides us that you might want to talk to , might be Stephane . phd c: and , professor a: Yeah , but phd c: they nnn they they they didn't phd e: I 'm not too experienced with harmonics professor a: I see . phd c: they think that the experience is not enough to phd e: and phd g: Is is this the algorithm where you hypothesize a fundamental , and then get the energy for all the harmonics of that fundamental ? phd c: No , no it 's No No . phd g: And then hypothesize a new fundamental and get the energy professor a: Yeah , that 's wh phd c: No . phd c: And The algorithm said that , eh , if you if you change the the the , eh , nnn the X - the frequency " X " , eh , using the in the instantaneous frequency , you can find , eh , how , eh , in several frequencies that proba probably the the harmonics , eh , professor a:  - huh . phd c: the errors of peaks the frequency peaks , eh , eh , move around these , eh eh frequency harmonic the frequency of the harmonic . And , eh , if you if you compare the the instantaneous frequency , eh , of the of the , eh , continuous , eh , eh , filters , that , eh that , eh , they used eh , to to to get , eh , the the instantaneous frequency , professor a:   phd c: it probably too , you can find , eh , that the instantaneous frequency for the continuous , eh , eh the output of the continuous filters are very near . phd c: And professor a: It 's it 's it 's I haven't worked with that either so I 'm not sure The way the simple - minded way I suggested was what Chuck was just saying , is that you could make a a sieve . professor a: Let 's let 's hypothesize that it 's this frequency or that frequency , and and , maybe you maybe you could use some other cute methods to , short cut it by by  , making some guesses , phd c: Yeah . professor a: but but    , I would ,   you could make some guesses from ,  from the auto - correlation or something but but then , given those guesses , try , only looking at the energy at multiples of the of that frequency , and and see how much of the take the one that 's maximum . phd g: Do you hafta do some kind of , low - pass filter before you do that ? phd c: I don't use . phd g: Or phd c: But , I I know many people use , eh , low - pass filter to to to get , eh , the pitch . phd g: But i But the harmonics are gonna be , I don't know what the right word is .  , they 're gonna be dampened by the  , vocal tract , right ? The response of the vocal tract . professor a: Yeah ? phd c: Yeah ? phd g: And so just looking at the energy on those at the harmonics , is that gonna ? professor a: Well so the thing is that the This is for , a ,  phd g: I m what you 'd like to do is get rid of the effect of the vocal tract . professor a: But ,  but I but but I don't know that you need to grad b: Open wide ! professor a: but I don't need you know if you need to get rid of it .  that 'd that 'd be nice but I don't know if it 's ess if it 's essential .  ,  cuz I think the main thing is that , you 're trying phd g:  - huh . professor a: wha what are you doing this for ? You 're trying distinguish between the case where there is ,  where where there are more than  , where there 's more than one speaker and the case where there 's only one speaker . professor a: So if there 's more than one speaker ,  yeah I guess you could I guess yeah you 're so you 're not distinguished between voiced and unvoiced , so so , i if you don't if you don't care about that phd c: Yeah . professor a: See , if you also wanna just determine if you also wanna determine whether it 's unvoiced , then I think you want to look look at high frequencies also , because the f the fact that there 's more energy in the high frequencies is gonna be an ob sort of obvious cue that it 's unvoiced . professor a: But , i i   i i but , other than that I guess as far as the one person versus two persons , it would be primarily a low frequency phenomenon . And if you looked at the low frequencies , yes the higher frequencies are gonna there 's gonna be a spectral slope .  that 's that 's w phd c: I will prepare for the next week eh , all my results about the harmonicity and will will try to come in and to discuss here , because , eh , I haven't enough feeling to to u many time to to understand what happened with the with , eh , so many peaks , eh , eh , and I I see the harmonics there many time but , eh , there are a lot of peaks , eh , that , eh , they are not harmonics . phd c: I have to discover what what is the the w the best way to to to c to use them professor a: Well , but yeah I don't think you can  you 're not gonna be able to look at every frame , so  I  I I really I I really thought that the best way to do it , and I 'm speaking with no experience on this particular point , but , my impression was that the best way to do it was however you You 've used instantaneous frequency , whatever . However you 've come up you with your candidates , you wanna see how much of the energy is in that phd c: Yeah . And , if it 's voiced , I guess so so y I think maybe you do need a voiced - unvoiced determination too . professor a: and the ,  e the fraction of the energy that 's in the harmonic sequence that you 're looking at is relatively low , then it should be then it 's more likely to be an overlap . This this is the idea the idea I I I had to to compare the the ratio of the the energy of the harmonics with the eh , with the , eh , total energy in the spectrum and try to get a ratio to to distinguish between overlapping and speech . professor a: But you 're looking a y you 're looking at Let 's take a second with this .  , you 're looking at f at the phase derivative , in in , what domain ?  this is this is in in in in bands ? Or or phd c: No , no , no . professor a: Just just overall phd c: It 's a it 's a o i w the band the band is , eh , from zero to to four kilohertz . And I I ot I professor a: And you just take the instantaneous frequency ? phd c: Yeah . to FFT to to obtain the or to study the harmonics from from the spectrum directly , professor a: Yeah . And another another algorithm I have is the in the instantaneous frequency , based on on on the FFT to to to calculate the the phase derivate in the time . phd c: But , eh , in m i in my opinion the the the instantaneous frequency , the the the behavior , eh , was th it was very interesting . Because I I saw eh , how the spectrum concentrate , eh , professor a: Oh ! phd c: around the the harmonic . But then when I apply the the rule , eh , of the in the the instantaneous frequency of the ne of the continuous filter in the the near filter , the the rule that , eh , people propose in the paper doesn't work . professor a: But the instantaneous frequency , wouldn't that give you something more like the central frequency of the you know , of the where most of the energy is ?  , I think if you Does i does it Why would it correspond to pitch ? phd c: Yeah . phd c: When first I I calculate , eh , using the FFT , postdoc f: Di - digital camera . professor a: Oh , so you scale you s you do a a scaling along that axis according to instantaneous phd c: I use Yeah . phd c: eh , when i I I use these these frequency , eh , the range is different , and the resolution is different . phd c: But , eh , they used , eh , a rule , eh , based in the in the because to to calculate the instantaneous frequency , they use a Hanning window . phd c: And , they said that , eh , if these peak are , eh , harmonics , the f instantaneous frequency , of the contiguous , eh w eh eh , filters are very near , or have to be very near . But , eh , phh ! I don't I I I I don I I and I don't know what is the what is the distance . And I tried to to put different distance , eh , to put difference , eh eh , length of the window , eh , different front sieve , Pfff ! and I I not sure what happened . I 'll probably gonna hafta look at the paper , but which I 'm not gonna have time to do in the next few days , but but I 'm I 'm curious about it . postdoc f: I I did i it did occur to me that this is  , the return to the transcription , that there 's one third thing I wanted to to ex raise as a to as an issue which is , how to handle breaths . So , I wanted to raise the question of whether people in speech recognition want to know where the breaths are . And the reason I ask the question is , aside from the fact that they 're obviously very time - consuming to encode , the fact that there was some I had the indication from Dan Ellis in the email that I sent to you , phd e: Yeah . postdoc f: and you know about , that in principle we might be able to , handle breaths by accessi by using cross - talk from the other things , be able that in principle , maybe we could get rid of them , so maybe And I was I I don't know ,  we had this an and I didn't couldn't get back to you , phd e: Yeah . postdoc f: but the question of whether it 'd be possible to eliminate them from the audio signal , which would be the ideal situation , professor a: I don't know think it 'd be ideal . professor a: We - See , we 're we 're dealing with real speech and we 're trying to have it be as real as possible phd e: Yeah . postdoc f: Well , except that these are really truly  , ther there 's a segment in o the one I did n the first one that I did for i for this , phd e: Yeah . postdoc f: where truly w we 're hearing you breathing like as if we 're you 're in our ear , you know , and it 's like it 's like professor a: Yeah . postdoc f: I y i  , breath is natural , but not professor a: It is but it is if you record it . postdoc f: Except that we 're we 're trying to mimic Oh , I see what you 're saying . grad b: The P D A might not have to , phd e: No i grad b: but more people than just PDA users are interested in this corpus . grad b: So so mean you 're right postdoc f: OK , then the then I have two questions . grad b: we could remove it , postdoc f: Yeah ? grad b: but I I think we don't wanna w remove it from the corpus , in terms of delivering it because the people will want it in there . If if it gets in the way of what somebody is doing with it then you might wanna have some method which will allow you to block it , but you it 's real data . You don't wanna b but you don't postdoc f: OK , well professor a: If s you know , if there 's a little bit of noise out there , and somebody is is talking about something they 're doing , that 's part of what we accept as part of a real meeting , even And we have the f  the  the the fan and the in the projector up there , and , this is it 's this is actual stuff that we we wanna work with . postdoc f: because i it basically has a i it shows very clearly the contrast between , speech recognition research and discourse research because in in discourse and linguistic research , what counts is what 's communit communicative . postdoc f: And breath , you know , everyone breathes , they breathe all the time . postdoc f: and the idea is that the transcripts will that get stored as a master there 'll be a master transcript which has in it everything that 's needed for both of these uses . postdoc f: And the one that 's used for speech recognition will be processed via scripts . Discourse side will have this this side over he the we we 'll have a s ch Sorry , not being very fluent here . But , this the discourse side will have a script which will stri strip away the things which are non - communicative . So then the then let 's let 's think about the practicalities of how we get to that master copy with reference to breaths . So what I would r r what I would wonder is would it be possible to encode those automatically ? Could we get a breath detector ? grad b: Oh , just to save the transcribers time . postdoc f: and just simply the keystrokes it takes to negotiate , to put the boundaries in , to to type it in , i it 's just a huge amount of time . postdoc f: And you wanna be sure it 's used , and you wanna be sure it 's done as efficiently as possible , and if it can be done automatically , that would be ideal . professor a: what if you put it in but didn't put the boundaries ? postdoc f: Well , but professor a: So you just know it 's between these other things , postdoc f: Well , OK . So now there 's there 's another another possibility professor a: right ? postdoc f: which is , the time boundaries could mark off words from nonwords . professor a: Yeah  I 'm think if it 's too if it 's too hard for us to annotate the breaths per se , we are gonna be building up models for these things and these things are somewhat self - aligning , so if so , we i i if we say there is some kind of a thing which we call a " breath " or a " breath - in " or " breath - out " , the models will learn that sort of thing .  , so but you but you do want them to point them at some region where where the breaths really are . But that would maybe include a pause as well , phd g: Well , there 's a there 's postdoc f: and that wouldn't be a problem to have it , pause plus breath plus laugh plus sneeze ? professor a: Yeah , i You know there is there 's this dynamic tension between between marking absolutely everything , as you know , and and and marking just a little bit and counting on the statistical methods . But if there seems to be a lot of effort for a small amount of reward in some area , and this might be one like this Although I I I 'd be interested to h get get input from Liz and Andreas on this to see if they Cuz they 've - they 've got lots of experience with the breaths in in , their transcripts . grad b: They have lots of experience with breathing ? phd g: I professor a: Actually Well , yes they do , but we we can handle that without them here . But but but , you were gonna say something about phd g: Yeah , I I think , one possible way that we could handle it is that , you know , as the transcribers are going through , and if they get a hunk of speech that they 're gonna transcribe , u th they 're gonna transcribe it because there 's words in there or whatnot . But if there 's a big hunk of speech , let 's say on Morgan 's mike where he 's not talking at all , don't don't worry about that . phd g: So what we 're saying is , there 's no guarantee that ,  So for the chunks that are transcribed , everything 's transcribed . So you just somebody can't rely on that data and say " that 's perfectly clean data " .  do you see what I 'm saying ? postdoc f: Yeah , you 're saying it 's uncharted territory . phd g: So I would say don't tell them to transcribe anything that 's outside of a grouping of words . phd e: Yeah , and that 's that that quite co corresponds to the way I I try to train the speech - nonspeech detector , as I really try to not to detect those breaths which are not within a speech chunk but with which are just in in a silence region . phd e: And they so they hopefully won't be marked in in those channel - specific files . professor a: u I I wanted to comment a little more just for clarification about this business about the different purposes . professor a: See , in a in a way this is a really key point , that for speech recognition , research , e a it 's not just a minor part . In fact , the I think I would say the core thing that we 're trying to do is to recognize the actual , meaningful components in the midst of other things that are not meaningful . So it 's critical it 's not just incidental it 's critical for us to get these other components that are not meaningful . professor a: if we had only linguistically - relevant things if if we only had changes in the spectrum that were associated with words , with different spectral components , and , we we didn't have noise , we didn't have convolutional errors , we didn't have extraneous , behaviors , and so forth , and moving your head and all these sorts of things , then , actually speech recognition i i isn't that bad right now . professor a: The the the reason we still complain about it is because is when when you have more realistic conditions then then things fall apart . I guess , I  , what I was wondering is what what at what level does the breathing aspect enter into the problem ? Because if it were likely that a PDA would be able to be built which would get rid of the breathing , so it wouldn't even have to be processed at thi at this computational le well , let me see , it 'd have to be computationally processed to get rid of it , but if there were , like likely on the frontier , a good breath extractor then , and then you 'd have to professor a: But that 's a research question , you know ? And so postdoc f: Yeah , well , see and that 's what I wouldn't know .  so so the thing is it 's it right now it 's just raw d it 's just data that we 're collecting , and so we don't wanna presuppose that people will be able to get rid of particular degradations because that 's actually the research that we 're trying to feed . So , you know , an and maybe maybe in five years it 'll work really well , postdoc f: OK . professor a: and and it 'll only mess - up ten percent of the time , but then we would still want to account for that ten percent , so . postdoc f: I guess there 's another aspect which is that as we 've improved our microphone technique , we have a lot less breath in the in the more recent , recordings , so it 's in a way it 's an artifact that there 's so much on the on the earlier ones . phd g: One of the  , just to add to this one of the ways that we will be able to get rid of breath is by having models for them . phd g: And so in order to build the model you need to have some amount of it marked , so that you know where the boundaries are . phd g: So  , I don't think we need to worry a lot about breaths that are happening outside of a , you know , conversation . We don't have to go and search for them to to mark them at all , but , if they 're there while they 're transcribing some hunk of words , I 'd say put them in if possible . postdoc f: OK , and it 's also the fact that they differ a lot from one channel to the other because of the way the microphone 's adjusted
Item 2, then, is a further evidence session, number four, on our inquiry into the status of the Welsh baccalaureate qualification. I'm very pleased to welcome Dafydd Evans, who is chair, ColegauCymru, and chief executive officer of Grp Llandrillo Menai; Kay Martin, principal of Cardiff and Vale College, also representing ColegauCymru; Nick Brazil, who is deputy principal, Gower College Swansea, also representing ColegauCymru; Dr Rachel Bowen, director of policy and development at ColegauCymru; and Ed Evans, who is the director and secretary of the Civil Engineering Contractors Association. If it's okay with you, we'll go straight into questions, and the first ones are from Sin Gwenllian. dafydd evans: Could I start and then open it up? Thank you very much for the opportunity to give evidence. But just to give you the context, I think, if you were asking about the vast majority of subjects what the view of ColegauCymruwould be, it would be quite unanimous, but I think on the Welsh bacthere is a difference of opinion, and I'm sure you'll hear those differences on the panel before you today. To answer the specific question, no, I don't think that employers have a clear understanding of what the Welsh bacmeans or what it includes. Personally I don't think that even the title of the Welsh bacis helpful, because it doesn't say what's happening in the tin. So, I think the skills challenge certificate is a better title, and is something that people understand a lot better than the Welsh bac. So, no, I don't think that employers understand the value or what we're trying to achieve through the Welsh bacat present. dafydd evans: Yes, it's a huge problem, but not only to employers, but also to parents and young people, of course. That, certainly, where there are larger employers, who've got people who are able to follow policy developments across the education spectrum, they may have more capacity to follow changes, get up to date with how Welsh education is evolving. And while there are lots of small engaged employers who have taken an interest and do understand, the vast majority are more focused on getting on with the day-to-day running of the business. And that means it's quite a challenge to understand what is the Welsh bac, what does it offer. And, certainly, when that's evolved over the past few years and there have been changes, it would have been quite difficult to keep up to date with those, I imagine. nick brazil: Could I add to that? As do many of my colleagueswithin the colleges, we have a number of employer boards, which we regularlymeet withemployersand I cannot think back as to how many employers say to us, 'That is what we requirethe Welsh bacto come and work within our industry.' Most of what they are questioning is the level of professional qualifications and the quality of skills withinthose professional sectors. I think many of them believe in the vision that was set out for the Welsh bacinitially, but the Welsh bachas turned into quite a rigorous, some would say demanding, qualification, which is putting a lot of pressure on in terms of bureaucracy, in terms of staff and the student getting all the information together at the end of theyear, and whether that's developing the skills that employers require is very questionable. And, as I said, from the employer boards that we have, very few of them understandthe Welsh bac. They certainly don't mention the Welsh bac and, as I said, are very much questioning the qualificationsthat have been provided to develop the actual professional skills needed within the industries. sian gwenllian am: Kay, is that your experience? kay martin: Certainly, it's very similar, and our employers want to make sure they get the right qualification. They're having enough headache getting around the differences with apprenticeships and the levy between England and Wales, and changes to qualifications.But they want them to get their main qualification. So, if you're an engineer, they want to get the engineering qualifications and theywant them to be literate, numerate, and they want them to have digital skills. ed evans: Do you mind if I carry on in English sian gwenllian am: Fine. I think it's fair to say employers don't understand it, that's for sure, but I think if they did, they would really appreciate this. For my sector in particularthe civil engineering sectorand particularly thecontracting sector, which depends very much on pupils who have come through from a less academic background, the Welsh bac gives them that ability, I guess, not to pursue so much of an academic focus, but to test them in terms of the challenges, but also, to. And I think if it was working properly and we did have employers engaged in this, andsupporting schools and colleges to deliver it, they would actually be learning a lot more directly from industry. And I think that's the issue for methat we've not really sold this to employers to actually engage with them. All of my understanding of this is literally as a parent, and that wouldbe true of a lot of employers as well. So, perhaps there are differences across the sector, but I think, certainly for my sector, we would really value the growth of the Welsh baccalaureate. sian gwenllian am: What are we going to do, then, to improve employers' understanding of the Welsh bac, and whose work is it to try to persuade employers that it is worth while, if you feel that it is worth while, of course? dafydd evans: I think we need to review the qualification, and I think the voice of employers should be a key part of that review, so that employability skills and entrepreneurial skills have more of a role withinthat qualification. And I think that rather than it being done by the colleges or by a qualificationsboard, I thinkthe employers. And the only way we'll get employer buy-in is that if they feel ownership of what's being done. Because I think that's what thevision was for the Welsh baccalaureatethat it was going to improve skills for employment. The aim is an excellent one, but I think we've lost our way in terms of what we do present at the end of the day, and I think having more input from employers would be a great help. I think there are opportunities to join up employers and schools and education facilities a lot more than we do at the moment. I suppose that the bee inmy bonnet is that we are involved in lots of social value-type contracts in this sector, and that to me is a perfect opportunity to tie in employers into schools and colleges and get that time and input from them into schools in a far more co-ordinated way. They're there to serve a really good purpose, but it's become a little bit piecemeal and a little bit tokenistic, whereas the Welsh bac offers an opportunity. So, why not link up those contractual clauses, which tie in employers and feed it directly into schools so that we have a far morestructured way of getting employers into schools? At the moment it's a little bitwe'll pick up the phone, we'll get a phone call, and it'll be, 'Can you come and do something for us?' It's tokenistic. We need to be far more clever in terms of how wejoin these things up, and then I think you'll start to get that business input there, but let's not be ad hoc about it. kay martin: Could I just add something? We've also got several other programmes that are engaging employers really well. Career Ready is a national programme, which we use in the college and which other colleges across the UK use. That's where employers mentor students so everyone has a mentor for the whole of the two years of the programme, from employment, and they all go out for at least six weeks' internship. So, they don't go for a day's work placement or two daysthey go for six-week internships. We've got BTEC learners who have gone through that programme and gone into law degrees with Freshfields law in London, which is one of the top law firms in the world. So, there are lots of other programmes as well, and perhaps there's a way of joining it all up together. But, in the college, we've got several different programmes going on with employers and the Welsh bac is one of them, but it's not the one that engages employers the best, certainly in our college. sian gwenllian am: So, do we get rid of it? lynne neagle am: You don't need to answer that. [Laughter.] sian gwenllian am: if there are so many other programmes helping anyway, why do we need it? nick brazil: I think that is a very good question, but I will go back to Ed's point, which I think was a very important point, which is that the initial vision for the Welsh bacI think when we go back a number of yearswas a really good, good vision for the Welsh bac. It was going to be an overarching qualification that developed these skills, and certainly employability skills, and I think it's lost its way since then. It's become a qualification and all the realms around becoming a qualification, and it's become very much focused on outcomes rather than necessarily skills. But you've got to listen to what Kay said as well: there are programmes already out there. So, why are we focusing one way when there are already programmes that work extremely well? I will go to the enhanced programmes, enhanced engineering and programmes that we are running within our college and that I know run in other colleges, which are much, much more focused on skills, much more focused in linking with industry, and they work extremely well. So, I think the question is: have we got programmes already in place, and do we need another one on top? But the vision initially for the Welsh bac, as I said, I will always be positive about. It's important for you to understand that although we always try and put the learner first, funding does drive behaviours, and the Welsh bac is fundable; Career Ready isn't. So, yes, there are options out there, but because we're so focused on qualifications and we will only fund qualifications, that drives certain behaviours, andI think you need as a committee to be very much aware of that. suzy davies am: Yes, but that was very useful information for us, because bearing in mind what Nick Brazil saidthat the vision of this was created as almost something that could have the status of something like a Duke of Edinburgh award without necessarily being a compulsory qualification; what was important was that the learners got the skills.However, if getting the qualification is how you get the money, then you can see why schoolswell, and indeed collegesmight be tempted to go for it. What are your views on how well the Welsh bac, at all levels, helps to prepare learners for employment? We've spoken to quite a few learners, and again we've had variable opinions coming back, so it's quite how they, from their perspective. dafydd evans: I think that one of the problems is that there are a number of priorities. And one of the problems that we have is that we have a number of children coming in to the colleges, and they need to resit their GCSEsin maths, English and Welsh. It's a valid priority for the Welsh Government for everyone to get aC grade in the core subjects. And so there's no room for everything in the curriculum somehowno room in the funding or also in terms of the time and the capacity of the learner to be able to do that number of qualifications. We've given priority to GCSEresitsrather than doing the Welsh bacat present. So, at levels 1 and 2, there are fewer and fewer doing 1 and 2 in the baccalaureate because they're resitting their GCSEs, and there is much more use of the Welsh bac at level 3, and A-level, and vocational level 3. nick brazil: Can I just add to that? I think, again, there's a misconception. The Welsh bac is a combination of qualifications; it's not just one qualificationit's a combination. So, to develop the employability skills obviously is a key part, and developing the skills for employment is a key part. But when you are focused, if you are a learner, on developing or achieving certain qualifications to make up the Welsh bacfor example, resits, your main qualification, plus your work for the Welsh bac, which is the skills challenge certificate as wellthat's a huge amount of work. And, obviously, when you're trying to achieve outcomesand we all get funded on the outcomesthat becomes the priority, and sometimes then we lose the focus on the skills, which are ultimately what were supposed to be part of the development for employability. And I think it was interesting, the comment that was made about the Duke of EdinburghI thought that's something that we need to think about. kay martin: If I could just say as well, our job in the college is to develop skills and employable people, and we use every tool in our box to do that. The Welsh bac, where it works really well, does help prepare them, I think, for employment, but it's not for everyone, because some people have to do the other things. Some people doing the equivalent of three A-levels, even in a vocational programme, it's too big for them. As you say, they're coming from schools, some of them with very few GCSEs, or they haven't got literacy and numeracy skills, they're being tested and many of them are below level 1 in terms of literacy and numeracy. So, I think it needs to be reviewed, to look at how we could make skilled and employable people. It helps prepare some peoplethe A-level students for universitybut does it help my health and social care people become more skilled and employable? No, it doesn't. dr rachel bowen: And this, ultimately, has to be about what's in the best interests of learners, and a one-size-fits-all approach isn't going to work. Is there a difference in how the Welsh bac is valued by learners at the different levels that it is studied? ColegauCymru said that learners may have had a negative experience of the Welsh bac in previous study. dafydd evans: That's been a new dimension lately, I think, in that, when the Welsh bac first hit FE, we were leading the way kay martin: Great advocates. By now, of course, they're coming to us having been through a Welsh bac experience at school, and therefore many of the learners feel that there's repeating going on then'Oh, we've done this at school already. Why are we doing it again at college?' So, I think that's a problem for us as well. So, at level 1 and level 2, it's not what we would call a crowd puller in colleges,but at level 3 it's more, especially for A-levels, because it can help them get into university, but even for the more able and talentedwe were discussing this, weren't we? We have learners who do four A-levels, but they don't do the Welsh baccalaureate because they're part of the Seren network, and they are going to be applying for Oxbridge or high-level Russell Group universities. So, the Welsh bac, although it's technically universally adopted by universities, it isn't adopted by every admissions tutor in every university. So, to get into some areas, like dentistry, for example, and some of the other Seren-type activities, four A-levels is better. But in most colleges thathave A-level students it's almost compulsory to do the Welsh bac as well, but normally that would be three A-levels and the Welsh bacnormally. And then ColegauCymru say that, increasingly, the Welsh bac is not being offered at post-16 national and foundation level. So, are the different levels of the Welsh bac valued differently by further education professionals? nick brazil: Yes. nick brazil: I think we've got to bear in mind when the students come to uscertainly when they're level 1, level 2 learnersthat a number of them have come from school andprobably not done as well as they'd hoped at their GCSEs. Okay, they've come to us, they're trying to build themselves back up, build their skills back up, and adding another qualification on top, adding the Welsh bac on top, whether that's foundation or national, on top of what they have to do, which is a programme they've come and decided to dothink of the pressure that increases upon them. Plus the fact is that they are resitting; they're probably having to resit GCSE English and maths as well. That's a huge volume of work for a learner who's probably come from alow base to begin with and who hasn't achieved what they wanted to. The whole idea when we bring them in at that level is that we want to build their confidence, build them up and, hopefully, eventually they will go to the stage where maybe the Welsh bac will be beneficial to them, when they've potentially hopefully progressed to level 3. And the important point that Dafydd raised was that there's a lot of repetition there in school, pre 16 to post 16 at those levels as well. So, learners don't come in banging at the door saying, 'We want to do the Welsh bac because it's exactly the same or very similar to what we did when we were in school.' They want to see some difference, they want to see some progress, and that's not necessarily the case in the foundation and national levels. dr rachel bowen: And we know that delivery in schools is of variable quality, so obviously that impacts on how learners have experienced it and perhaps how they view it when they get to FE college. janet finch-saunders am: Okay.A question, then, just to ColegauCymru: to what extent do you believe that universities in the main understand the value of the Welsh bac? kay martin: Well, we don't think they do, really, especially the experience we have with some of our learners to go to Russell Group universities. I talked earlier about my own daughter who was allowed to drop a grade in order to get into a Russell Group university because she had the Welsh bac as well, but it was a very paper-based exercise. But I think it is mixed, and it does depend on the admissions tutors and the areas that they're going into in universities. In some areas, and certainly the local universities around hereUniversity of South Wales, Cardiff Metropolitan Universityvalue it in a great number of subjects, particularly in sport, when our students go to Cardiff Met, and business studies, when our learners go to USW. It is valued by them and they accept it, but when people go further afieldand we're always trying to push our learners beyond. lynne neagle am: Did you have a supplementary, Sin? sian gwenllian am: Yes. A great number of our learners get into Cardiff using the Welsh baccalaureate, but would their admissions tutors prefer four A-levels? Absolutely. nick brazil: Could I jump in there? I've got to jump in there as, from the institution I'm in, we've had a long track record of getting learners into top universities. About 20 per cent of our learners go to Russell Group universities, and there is no doubtin certainly 50 per cent of those, they do not value the Welsh bac. But if they do offer an option with the Welsh bac, they say it is on top of three A2-level grades. I think the Seren programme that's been put in by the Welsh Government is looking to increase the numbers applying to top universities and top courses, but you look through the range, particularly in science, technology, engineering and mathematics subjects as well, across a number and range of universities,the Welsh bac is always added as the additional one. So, bear in mind, then, that Welsh students are fighting for places against Scottish, Northern Irish and, potentially, English students who are studying three subjects, whereas our Welsh students potentially could be doing three A2s, three A-level subjects plus the Welsh bac. And, as we talked about earlier on, the Welsh bac has evolved into quite a rigorous, you could say complicated, qualification, which puts added pressure on a learner in year 2 when they're trying to get possibly three A* grades. In relation to the first answer, it is variable, and the admissions tutors throughout a lot of universities will make different decisions, and also make the decision dependent on whether it's a facilitating subject or an enabling subject, which the Russell Group report indicates about facilitating subjects, and Welsh bac at the moment is not a facilitating subject. Because of the nature of our catchment area, there is a greater percentage of our students staying in Welsh universities, and, as Kay said, Welsh universities are much more willing to recognise the bac. But, naturally, we do have students who are looking to go out to universities in England in the Russell Group, and we're having the same experience there where there are differences between the policy that that university extols and what actually happens on the ground when students have interviews in those universities. sian gwenllian am: But in terms of Bangor and Glyndr University, there's no problem there, though. I think you've already got into this bit of the discussion, but what are your views on how comparable the Welsh bac is to other qualifications? I don't know if you've got any more comments on that. dafydd evans: Well, obviously, as we noted, it's become a very rigorous, very large qualification. And, therefore, regarding the rigour and so forth, that's absolutely fine, but I think one of the problems that you're hearing is that perhaps the Welsh bac is trying to be all things to all men. At one end of the spectrum it's trying to be a rigorous qualification that stands up to a Russell university's expectations, and on the other hand, it's trying to develop softer skills and employment skills for people going into work from a vocational area. Can the same product deliver those two outcomes? I'm certainly not sure, and perhaps we need to think: what are we trying to achieve with this qualification? julie morgan am: Right. kay martin: Yes, and earlier, we talked as well about that difference for the A-level students. For the vocational students, some things like the Career Ready programme, which is used in other colleges, and WorldSkills, you know, where all colleges have really been pushing to get more learners into WorldSkills at national and international level. And for some of our learners, particularly if we take our engineering learners, then having somebody who has competed in Europe as a tiler or an electrician would, I think, make an employer think, 'I'd better look at this person', whereas the other onehas done the Welsh bac.I think they would look at the WorldSkills person first. So, for some of our learners, we choose that you do WorldSkills, because that is going to be more valuable for you as a skill, and to show to an employer how much extra time you've put in. So, they put a lot of timeyou know, to get somebody into a WorldSkills competition is not just a couple of hours a week, it isn't just the normal curriculumthey have extra time. They are more able and talented vocational learners, and that is more valuable to those learners and I think it's more valid for employers than the Welsh baccalaureate. You know, it is comparable, as long as it's right for that learner's future. But if a learner wants to go into a particular sector and the Welsh bac is not accepted, it's not comparable. But, then, if it is into a certain sector and the skills are being developed in the right manner for that sector, absolutely. julie morgan am: What are the reasons why some colleges do see it as being rigorous and others don't? Why does the view vary? ed evans: Can I give perhaps an employer's perspective on that, which might be completely wrong, but it's been interesting listening to what's been said here? About a year ago, we bought theWJEC in to speak to our employers, or a number of them, just to explain to them what the Welsh bac was aboutback to listening and about understanding, really, and it just was not there at all. I could see that most of the employersthere were really impressed with it once they understood what it was about and they saw the opportunities at a whole host of levels. We've kind of gone into an university discussion here, but there are school leavers leaving at 16 or 18. The skills that they bring having gone through this process I think most of the employers could get, at least in my sector, they could understand'I can see what that person can do.' But we've also seen it from university-educated people as well. Those that bring a little bit of world experience, a little bit of the Welsh bac-type of things, just become far more rounded and useful people. I can understand why there's a certain obsession, almost, with the academic side of it, but I think we lose that vocational bit at our peril, and to a certain extent we probably haven't got it in many quarters anyway. And those skills that are learnt in the Welsh bac, can they be learnt in any of the other qualifications? Because I know that Cambridge university said to us they thought, in the four A-levels that they asked for, that those skills were there. kay martin: It probably depends on the subjects thatpeople are studying and the combination of subjects and the institution. Generally, in college, even if they're doing A-levels, they go out on some community projects or work-related education, without the Welsh baceven if they're not doing that. dafydd evans: I think there's a real danger of us perhaps becoming overly critical here as well of the Welsh bacin terms ofI don't think it's perfect by a long way, however, learners are getting some value out of that process. Certain learners in departments where they have really worked hard to contextualise the Welsh bacwithin the vocational area, within the A-level subjects that the learners are doing, are finding it very rewarding. I think what we're suggesting is there may be even better ways of doing it and better ways of explaining to people what it's about. nick brazil: On this point about the skills being developed, I think that's debatable if all the skills that are supposed to be developed in the Welsh bacare being developed, and that's why I think there's a need to relook at it to make sure those skills are being developed fully. But I will go back to the point that I think a comparable qualification is comparable as long as it achieves the right outcome for that particular learner. If you force a learner to do something that is not necessarily going to achieve the outcome that they require in their future, is it the right thing to be doing for that learner? That's what my concern is. dr rachel bowen: I think the baccalaureateapproach is best at producing independent, inquiry-based learners who have the skills to look to teachers not as sources of information but just for guidance. That whole sort of approach about creating inquisitive young people with the skills that we've discussed, that's a real positive. The chances are that we've lost some of that by trying to fit it into being a specific qualification. suzy davies am: Yes, to both Rachel Bowen and Nick Brazil, if you don't mind. Both of you mentioned this is about skills and a piece of paper that demonstrates that you have these skills. At pre 16, would it be fair to say that there have been occasions when people have come presenting those pieces of paper but actually show none of the skills that they were supposed to have? The reason I'm asking this question, having had children who've gone through the process myself, is that in some schools, and I'm not saying all, doing the bacis something that everybody does in the last four weeks of term, and that undermines the whole idea of the bacanyway. Is that a fair observation? dr rachel bowen: I think it's perfectly possible for learners to reach FE college having attained the Welsh bacunder the process that you've described, and without necessarily having gone through the holistic inquiry-based independent skills that we would want to see. nick brazil: Yes, and at interview process or during an interview, or in the first week, you can see that they haven't developed those skills, and I think it is down to the variable models that have been put in place. There are lots of different models, and if you put, as I said, the model that you've described in place, there is no way, in that period of time, you're going to develop those skills. But that indicates, again, the value that people are putting on the qualification, if they are squeezing it into three or four weeks of term. lynne neagle am: Julie, did you have any more questions? julie morgan am: No, I've finished, thank you. lynne neagle am: We've got some questions now then, from Suzy, on universal adoption. suzy davies am: Well, I'm wondering if I need to ask them, really, because I think I'm getting a strong sense that you all think that universal adoption is a bad idea at this moment in time. However, I do want to test something, because we have had witnesses who say that it would be a good idea because it reduces the amount of competition and advantage that certain institutions have. So, for example, we had an indication from the union representing Welsh-speaking teachers that if the baccalaureate was universally adopted, it would remove an artificial choice, basically, for learners,i.e. they were losing Welsh-speaking students who didn't want to do the bac to English-speaking institutions. So, I wonder if you could tell me how much the decision in your individual colleges not to offer bacis down to the opportunity that it presents you to attract students, particularly from sixth forms, where students may be obliged to do the bac. I'd like to think that all the staff in all the colleges do what is in the best interests of the learner. In some cases, it's to go back to school, and we absolutely say, 'You need to go back to school.' If somebody comes from a Welsh-medium school, then usually I will speak to the head and make sure that we havea programme in place, that either they're studying their programme bilingually or through the medium of Welsh, or that we make sure that they absolutely keep their Welsh language skills. We don't say, 'Come to us and you don't have to do the Welsh bac,' because if they do A-levels, we say it's compulsory, unless you're in the Seren group. Well, that's the point; it's about English-speaking students, not just Welsh. In the majority of colleges across Wales, it is absolutely not used as a recruitment tool, because most of us, as you see, we value the Welsh bac. We'd like some changes to the Welsh bac, but we value the Welsh bacin many cases. , if a course in my college doesn't want to do the Welsh bac, they have to come and give me evidence about why they don't think it's fit and what they're going to do in place of it. So, we don't deliberately tell people, 'Comeon in and you won't have to do it.' suzy davies am: Okay, can I run that across you all, in an outburst of honesty? dafydd evans: Yes, absolutely. suzy davies am: Oh, yes, for the reasons you've given in the evidence, actually. dafydd evans: Yes, but across the whole of level 3, A-level and vocational, the Welsh bacis an integral part of the curriculum, and it isn't an option for the student to opt out. lynne neagle am: Do you let your Serenstudents opt out like they do in Cardiff and the Vale, or do they have to do it as well? dafydd evans: We've forced. nick brazil: I've got to be honest, at present, with our college, we do not ask. It's an option of one of our choiceswe have a large choiceand I think it comes back to that fact that we're just making the assumption all learners are getting all the correct advice and guidance from all the institutions. I think it's something we all need to consider across the nation, that all learners are getting the right advice and guidance for their future. I will go back to the point I made earliereverything's comparable as long as it's the right thing for the learner's future, and I genuinely believe, and I'm sure a lot of colleagues believe, that that choice element is important to a learner, okay. If it is the right choice and if the Welsh bacis the right choice, that is correct, and we move that along. But you've got to be doing the right things for the learner, and we are certainly not selling it, 'Cometo us; you don't do the Welsh bac.' It is part of what we offer. It is part of what the college's curriculum offersthere is no doubt about thatand then people make a choice according to what they need to do to actually progress to what they need to do in their future. You explained earlier that if people knew what the bac was about in your sector, they'd value it more greatly, which I accept. Are you worried at all, though, that some of the more able and talented STEM students, in particularwho are needed in your sector, after allmight be deterred from doing those four A-levels because of the bac, because, presumably, you need a mix of these talents? You talked about the more able and talented vocational learners, but also you have more able and talented academic learnerspresumably you need them all. I think the discussion that I've had with our employers has been around the academic side of things, if you like. Again, I'll come back to the input of businesses to support that delivery of commercial skills and so on, but I think I probably made that point earlier. There's clearly going to be different individuals who will cope better, and they will be, I guess, maybe guided as well by parents to a certain degree in terms of, 'You do those four and forget about that nonsense there', which is not helpful, but I can understand why that happens. I guess that's what a lot of our employers saw the Welsh bacas being able to do. nick brazil: Can I just add something to that? I think Ed's just said about the softer skills. Do the softer skills have to be developed through qualification? I think Kay mentioned a programme earlier on within her college. So, I think we're all in agreement about the development of the skills, but does it need to be through a qualification? lynne neagle am: And you've said that you make the decision in the best interests of the learner. Are you aware, then, of any young people who are coming to you from the Swansea area because they've got that flexibility, which they may not have in one of the local schools? nick brazil: As I said, in terms of our offer, we offer a range in the curriculum. We're not going out there saying, 'Cometo us for this particular reason.' lynne neagle am: No, but does anybody come to you and say, 'Well, actually, I've really come here because I don't have to do the Welsh bac'? nick brazil: The honest answer is it's one of the first questions that people always ask. But, as I've said, as a parent, I've been to open evenings and other open evenings. It's generally a question that people ask,'DoI have to do the Welsh bac?' It does come across not just in our open evenings, but in other open evenings that I've been to. They do want to know that, and it's usually, as I said, one of the first questions that they ask. sian gwenllian am: And is that the parents asking the question or the pupil? nick brazil: It's a combination. But, honest answer, I would say parents, a lot of the time, but the learners usuallyas I saidhave sometimes had not the best experience pre 16 and that's why they ask the question straight away. sian gwenllian am: Can I suggest that maybe, then, the perception that parents have is steering the way rather than the actual benefits for the pupil in your institution? If you're telling them, 'Cometo us, you don't have to actually do it because we know you don't like it', is that the correct way of approaching education? nick brazil: No. nick brazil: Yes, I know, I totally understand, but it's about offering the full range of qualification opportunities for learners. If you don't offer the full range, which, sometimesif you, obviously, limit and you make qualifications compulsory, that can limit the choice of opportunities as well. There are some places in, I would think, some sixth forms now, where certain qualifications may not be offered now because of the need to pick up an extraWelsh bac. So, for example, modern foreign languages is reducing quite dramatically in Wales, and, I think, I picked up today a few schools had been saying that one of the reasons is, 'We have to put our focus on the Welsh bacto ensure that is achieved rather than giving the opportunity to do the modern foreign language.' sian gwenllian am: But it could be a short-sighted view because what some young people tell us is that at the timeand parentsthey didn't really appreciate what skills they were actually learning, and by the time they'd got into employment, that working as a team, the communication skills, they thought, 'Ah, wedid. So, to try and, sort of, discourage it at a younger age may be doing them a disservice in the long run. Anybody want to pick that up? dafydd evans: We certainly have experience of that, of young people coming in with quite a negative attitude, originally, to the Welsh bac and taking it on board. But where we are delivering it well, well contextualised, they've really enjoyed the experience, and very much valued the experience. dafydd evans: But don't underestimate the fact thatif you had a poor experience of the Welsh bacat school, that perception is very difficult for us, as institutions, then, to change. dr rachel bowen: It does make it into quite an intensive selling process for colleges when they've got to overcome that negative perception. As people have said already, it is possible to talk parents and learners round, but then that's time spent having to do that selling job when we should be talking about other things. kay martin: Can I just mention as well that there's a bigger job in helping parents to understand that the only qualifications in the world are not A-levels? Perhaps you might want to do an engineering BTEC programme, or you might want to do a health and social care, or you might want to do hospitality. You might want to do BTECprogrammes, you can still go to university if that's what you want to do, or you can go into an apprenticeship afterwards, and selling that whole range to parents, because there is an overemphasis, by us all, on A-levels. A lot of this has been covered, actually, but just on those final points there, I'm wondering whether you think that introducing a specialist teacher-training qualification to deliver the Welsh bacwould actually help in some way in improving its status and perception and so on. What do you think about that? dafydd evans: I'm not assured in terms ofyes, training is required regarding the Welsh bac, but where we are seeing it more successfully is where vocational lecturers have actually taken it on board. When we were bringing lecturers from outside'Welsh bacspecialists' in inverted commasit was not working well. It has started to work well when our sports lecturers have taken the Welsh bac on board and have put it in the context of the sports curriculum. Therefore, no, I think that if it's going to be a success, it's got to be contextualised, and for the vocational lecturers to do that, and we've invested heavily in training those vocational lecturers to understand how to deliver the Welsh bacand get positive outcomes of the Welsh bac. nick brazil: And I think you've got to bear in mind that the number of the skills and the number of challenges that are done within the Welsh bacare done very similarly within the vocational qualification as well. I suppose when it comes to the word 'credibility' used in terms of the qualification, yes, I'm sure it would raise that focus on it, but ultimately, it's taking away from the fact that we have got staff who've got those skills and they're developing them within other elements of the vocational qualifications they're doing. Something we were talking about earlier on is the fact is that, sometimes, that work is being repeated twice, because of the nature of the qualification. dawn bowden am: And have you got dedicated time? Because one of the things we picked up from schools was that teachers in particular were kind of fitting it in with other lessons, and therefore, it wasn't being, again, given the same perceived level of importance as doing A-levels were. But your lecturers would all have dedicated time to deliver kay martin: On their timetables, yes. ed evans: I was just going to add there, really, if you want to raise the profile amongst parents in particular, if you've got thatfar clearer link between businesses coming in to deliver this. Apologies, I'd almost forgotten that we were in the Colegau thing, I was thinking 'schools' actually [Laughter.] But in terms of bringing those businesses into schools in a structured way, not an ad-hoc way, which is just a friend turning up to talk about something, a structured way. We have a programme under way at the moment called 'contextualising the curriculum' in the sector that we hope to roll out. Now, if that was rolled out across the boardI'm not saying that it makes it easier for teachers in particular, but they are going to struggle to deliver some of these commercial and world-skilled, global areas, because it's not their bag. So, bring insome experts, bring in some business, raise the profile, and I think then, possibly, you'll start to get parents thinking, 'Actually, there is something more to this than just the academic bit.' dawn bowden am: Okay. Can I just ask? You've all got slightly different policies; they don't have to do it in Swansea, in Cardiff and the Vale, they do unless they're in the Seren network, and in your college, everybody does it, even if they're doing four A-levels. Do you think that's a satisfactory situation, and are you satisfied with the communication and the guidance and the steer that everyone's getting from Welsh Government on this? Because we're meant to have a policy of universal adoption, but that doesn't really seem to be happening on the ground. kay martin: And I think, if you'd asked us a few years ago, we were all heading for universal adoption, but because the Welsh bachas changed into something that isn't 100 per cent what we think it should be, then we've stopped the universal adoption, if you like. So, we are trying to do what's in the best interests of the learner, but I think, as you said, we've mentioned some other programmes, and if we could look at. We've got industry experts that are brought into colleges as well, some more than others, to bring that to life, if you like. We've got mentorship programmes, we send people out, and we just need to incorporate that better. We need to spend less time in checking what they've done on assessment and more time in the doing, and the experiential learning that they need to do, rather than it being too much of a paper exercise. By the time you've done all the paperwork you haven't got time to do any of the learning. nick brazil: I think, just to support Kay, we're going to need to go back to the original vision of the Welsh bac, which all of us would buy into 100 per cent. I think that has been lost as the qualification's developed over time, and, ultimately, I think all of us would like to see it go back to that to provide those skills that Ed has brought up and everything. We visited Spain recently, and there they have an entrepreneurship and enterprise unit that is mandatory for everybody, but it appeared to be far more fit for purpose than the Welsh bacis currently. Therefore, I think what we're saying is, if we're going universal adoption, it can't be with this product. Well, can I thank you all for attending and for answering our questions? It's been a very informative and interesting discussion. We will, as usual, send you a transcript to check for accuracy following the meeting, but thank you again for your time this morning. Paper to note 1 is a letter from the Minister for Children, Older People and Social Care regarding the Childcare Funding (Wales) Bill, paper to note 2 is the letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Education to the Children's Commissioner for Wales on home education, and paper to note 3 is the letter that the Cabinet Secretary for Education has sent to us in reply to our letter about free school meals. Item 4, then: can I propose in accordance with Standing Order 17.42 that the committee resolves to meet in private for the remainder of the meeting? Are Members content? Yes.
I'll take this opportunity to welcome Dawn formally to the committee but also to place on record our thanks to John Griffiths for his service to the committee. I'm very pleased to welcome Kirsty Williams, Cabinet Secretary for Education, Eluned Morgan, Minister for Welsh Language and Lifelong Learning, and Huw Morris, who is the group director of skills, higher education and lifelong learning. If we can just start with teacher training and teacher training for secondary school teachers in particular, obviously there's been what looks like a trend in recent years in filling the places for secondary school training. Do you think there's still a problem recruiting teachers into the 300 priority places, or is there a trend where things are getting better? kirsty williams am: Thank you, Suzy. I think, for this year's intake, although we're in touch with our providers, we're not in a position to be able to give figures for this year's intake for a couple of months. But what we have seen over recent years is that we are only recruiting to about 65 per cent of those targets. So, what we're doing is first of all making sure that our ITE provision is world class, so that, actually, Welsh centres are the place to go to train to be a teacher. You'll be aware that we've recently been through an accreditation process for new ITE provision that will start in the next academic year. It's not the whole answer, I think, to these issues, but it's part of a mixture of things that we need to do. You'll be aware that, for priority subjects, with graduates with the very highest levels of qualifications, those financial incentives are now 20,000 a year. We have initially done some work in the last year specifically targeting Welsh students in studying for priority subject degrees, e-mailing them, sending them materials to ask them to consider (1) becoming a teacher, and (2) crucially coming to do that training here in Wales. We are now part of a full national programme of ITErecruitment, giving people that idea that you can serve your nation and your community by training to be a teacher. In January of this year I set up an advisory board on the recruitment and retention of teaching staff, and we are awaiting some reports from that advisory group on what they feel that we should do next. I can see there's a lot of activity, but what exactly is it responding to? Presumably, some research has been done about why people don't want to become teachers so that the answers you come up with are appropriate answers. I can't believe it's just about ITE, although this is very valuable, what you're talking about. Is there something that's running through our younger learners at the moment that makes them think that teaching isn't a profession they wantto go into? Is that something that's happening just in Wales or is it happening elsewhere as well? kirsty williams am: No. I think they are suffering quite acute problems across the border, which proves to me that money isn't necessarily the entire answer, because, despite higher financial incentives to join ITE courses, they're not able to do that in England either. So, that proves to mewhat the research does showthat it's not money alone that will get people onto these courses. Recently, as you'll be aware via my written statement, I attended the Atlantic RimCollaboratory, which is a system-to-system conference. If you talk to education systems in different parts of the world, the one common factor that we are all grappling with is teacher recruitment and retention. In the USA, they have seen a 40 per cent drop in the number of students training to be teachers. I met with New York statesignificant teacher recruitment and retention problems in New York state, and in Finland, Australia. That's why we set up the advisory group under the chairmanship of Professor John Gardnerit's to understand what the issues are exactly that are preventing people or putting people off. One of the things that we have got strong performance in, and I think this is perhaps something that we're trying to follow up on, are employment-based routes into qualified teacher statusso, those are people who are training on the job. There's high demand for those places, so much so that we've increased those places to 90 last year and 90 again this year, which says to me thatthere's definitely a place for the traditional, 'Take a year off, do a postgraduate certificate in education in a university for a year'actually, that type of course suits some students but it might be preventing other people from pursuing a qualification in teaching, which is why, of course, from next year, we will have our unique part-time PGCEroute into qualification. So, that allows people to perhaps combine some of their employment opportunities, so they can earn while they learn, or maybe they've got caring responsibilities that prevent them from going to do a full-time course. I think that will give us an alternative route that people can take to gain qualified teacher status and work in our schools. So, there's no one thing, I think, that we can do that will solve this issue. Well, that's what I was after finding out, and, actually, what you've just said about the part-time PGCEis pretty interesting as well, because if you can bring your outside world experience into teaching, that's got to help, hasn't it? kirsty williams am: Can I just agree with you? I think that is really, really importantthat we have a diversity in our teaching workforce. I think the different dynamic that brings to a school and the experience that brings to children is really, really valuable. I was up in the DeesideSixth just last week, talking to the A-level chemistry teacher. She had been a teacher for a while, she'd gone into industry, worked in industry, and now had come back into teaching. She said that she felt that that made her a better educator and she could talk with knowledge and experience about the opportunities outside of teaching that the students in front of her could pursue. I'm very keen to increase the diversity in our teaching workforce and I'm very keen in looking at career changers, who perhaps have different life experience and work experience, coming into our teaching profession. Part of that diversity, of courseit would be great if you had more people interested in qualifying to teach through the medium of Welsh. No-one can solve this in 280 characters, I get that, but can you give us some indication about why you think this is proving still such an unattractive option when it's clear that there's a policy for this country to improve the number of Welsh speakers? You'd have thought there'd be a pretty good carrot for this. Again, data for recruitment for the 2018-19 cohort is not yet available and we are, as I said, keeping in touch with our ITEcentres to keep a close eye on them. I think an important thing to recognise is that there is a difference between the number of people who are on courses where there is a specific designation that enables them to teach through the medium of Welsh and those people who have linguistic ability and Welsh ability but don't necessarily do a course that allows them. We do think that, for the 2016-17 cohort, there were an additional 130 qualifiersthat, actually, were fluent in Welsh and who could have gone on to teach in Welsh-medium schools, didn't necessarily do a course that gave them that designation. But, clearly, we've got three academic years now to get to the targets that we've set ourselves. The evaluation of Welsh-medium provision in ITE reported at the end of last month, and the Minister and officials are busy working now to implement the recommendations of the report that was published, I think, on 28 September, to be able to move this agenda forward. Again, we've got new incentives, this year, both for people starting their course and then for teachers who complete their QTS after a year. So, we've added in new financial incentives this year to try and address some of those issues. But, clearly, these are ambitious targets and we will need to have a step change over the next three years if we're to meet them. If they're from Wales, they will have had Welsh as part of their education from day one, and we'll accept there are varyingqualities in different parts of Wales, different attitudes towards it as well. But there isn't a single a person now who's been through Welsh education who can say they have no Welsh at all, unless they've moved into the systemfrom, say, England very, very recently. What is being done within the teaching qualifications, including the degrees, to ensure that, at least in Welsh universities, those nascent Welsh language skills are at least kept alive, even though we're not talking necessarily about being at a level where people can teach through the medium? It'sthe age-old question: once the school gate closes, is that the end of their Welsh use? So, is there somethingit won't be Donaldson, but in the teacher training qualificationsthat is keeping this going and, hopefully, increasing the usability of the Welsh skills they have? kirsty williams am: Well, in terms of how we can encourage children who have got Welsh skills as a result of their education up to 16, how they cancontinue to use those skills and, potentially, use them in the workplace, I'm sure Eluned will want to talk aboutsome of the work, for instance, in other, non-teaching sectors. But, with regard to ITE, you'll be aware that, in the evaluation report, as I said, that was published, the report comes forward with two options in how we could develop an intervention programme to support Welsh languageskillsamongst all primary and secondary ITEentrants. So, what we'll be doing now as a result of that report is that we'll be working very closely with our ITEcentresto develop and agree upon minimum provision that constitutes those skill levels within ITEprovision for all teachers. llyr gruffydd am: You have your targets for 2021, in terms of numbers of teachers coming through the system, which is positive, although, clearly, the report or the review itself said that, actually, we need to double the numbers, really. But it's not just the trends that are going down; it's a cataclysmic drop, really. We've lost 24 per cent in the number of people over the last four or five years who are going into teacher training to study subjects that they could teach through the medium of Welsh. So, it's a huge turnaround that we're looking for, and I'm not getting the feeling that the level of ambition and the answers that you're giving here this morningreflect the level of action that'sneeded, really. kirsty williams am: Well, first of all, as I tried to illustrate to Suzy, the figures on theirowntell one story, but there are additional people in the system with an ability to speak Welsh and to be able to use llyr gruffydd am: I think it's40 per centof those who are currently in the system who don't kirsty williams am: the language and skills. And if we look at qualifiers of ITE courses in Wales by degree type, actually, we see a different trendwe see numbers going up. That's why we have got the evaluation of provision in ITEand that's why we'll be taking that ambitionforward. Clearly, there are statisticsand there are statistics, so could you just explain to us which statistics you've used for your targets for growth over the next three years? kirsty williams am: Well, that comes as a result of the work done for the 2050 llyr gruffydd am: Upon which baseline are you basing the increases that you're projecting? kirsty williams am: We're using the baseline of 2012-13. llyr gruffydd am: That's the one I was using when I said '24 per cent reduction'. That's why, as I said, we're doing the work that we need to do to reverse that decline. In using those numbers, we also know that there are additional people in the system who are not captured in those figures and who do have the linguistic ability to use their language positively in school settings. So, what I'm saying is that that doesn't tell us the whole story, but I will be the first to admit that there is a significant job of work with our ITE providers to ensure that we will have the skilled professionals that we need to deliver on our ambitions, and I'm not hiding from that. eluned morgan am: Also, I just think it's worth saying that a lot of this is about building the confidence of those people who actually can speak Welsh, who are not teaching through the medium of Welsh, and to give them that support. First of all, we need to identify who these people are, so there is a job of work being undertaken now in terms of registration in particularwhen people register, let's just make sure that we collect that kind of data. One of the recommendations of the report is that there is no consistent approach to understanding this baseline data and there's no consistent competency test that people start at the beginning of their course, so we need a national approach rather than leaving it to individual institutions. llyr gruffydd am: Have we missed any tricks, potentially, in terms of the reforms to accrediting ITE, for example, in terms of, maybe, strengthening aspects around the Welsh language and provision in that respect? kirsty williams am: No, I don't believe so. The accreditation process, which is independent of the Governmentthe accreditation process demands of our ITEproviders that their provision will be able to meet the goals of our curriculum. Our curriculum is very clear about the equality of the language and the ability of our children, through all stages of their education journey, to be able to be bilingual children. llyr gruffydd am: So, that requirement, as far you're concerned, is there. lynne neagle am: Before I turn to Hefin, can I just clarify? In answer to Suzy Davies, you said that 65 per cent of the places in Welsh training centreshad been filled. hefin david am: The decision by the EducationWorkforce Councilnot to accredit the University of South Wales with the ability to deliver teacher trainingwhat are your views and concerns about that? kirsty williams am: The process is independent of Government, and it would not be appropriate for me to comment on that, especially as I understand that there is an appeals process that may be being undertaken. What I would say is that from the very outset of our ITEreforms we have made it very clear that I expect very high standards in our ITEsystem, but the process is independent of this Government. I have confidence in the people who have been appointed by the EWCto undertake that process, but it is independent of me, and it's not appropriate for me to comment on that further. hefin david am: I fully understand that and the need for distance for the EWC, but there'll be an impact on students and staff. Students, first of all: are you concerned that the reduction in providers might have an impact on students, and those students going through the second year at USW? Would you have concerns about that issue? kirsty williams am: In terms of the overall numbers, we will be looking to commission from those institutions that have been accredited the number of training places that our planning tool says that we need. Clearly, there will be a responsibility upon the University of South Wales to ensure that those students already in the system are able to complete their studies and their course, with the appropriate level of support and tuition to enable them to achieve their career aspirations and to graduate from that programme. hefin david am: And what about the uncertainty for staff, or would you say that's an issue for the university itself? kirsty williams am: These are autonomous bodies. They have to act accordingly, in compliance with any employment law or any statutory responsibilities that they would have as an employer. That's not a matter for me; that is a matter for the institution that is an autonomous body. hefin david am: But I would be surprised if you weren't keeping an eye on this, given that it has been a key provider. Are you aware of when the appeal decision will be known? kirsty williams am: My understanding is that the appeals process is ongoing, and next month, perhaps. But as I said, this is a process that is independent of Government hefin david am: But it will have an impact for what you do. kirsty williams am: It will potentially change the nature of the people from whom we commission places, but as I said, I do not have any concerns that we will not be in a position to commission the appropriate number of training places that we will need as a result of our planning. suzy davies am: It's not directly about USW; it's about the geographic spread of provision. I wonder if you could just give us a snapshot of what that looks like, and whether you thinkcertainly for PGCE or postgrad courses, anywaythat if they're not accessible geographically and we've got students who already have three years' worth of debt, they're not going to be looking to, necessarily, live away from home for a fourth year, and may want to study nearer home. Has there been any research done on the access to these postgradcourses, about where people are coming from and whether that's had an impact on the fact that some of these places haven't been filled? kirsty williams am: Currently, with our current providers, there is a significant geographical spread. There are centres here in the south-east, there are centresin the south-west, in mid Wales, and in north Wales. We do think that, for some students, accessibility is an issue, and of course that's why we are responding with our part-time PGCEroute, which actually will be location neutral, because you will be able to study that as a distance learner, and so you will be able to remain in your community and undertake that course. So, if geographical disadvantage is stopping somebody from pursuing a career aspiration to qualify as a teacher, our new part-time PGCE, as I said, will allow them to do that. We're going to move on now to talk about reform and reconfiguration of the post-16 education sector. There are some encouraging provisional signs regarding the demand for part-time undergraduate study for the first year of Diamond, but the 12.5 million reductionHigher Education Funding Council for Walesis having to make this academic year has potentially placed the funding for part-time provision under pressure. Is there a danger that, without maintaining and growing this funding, Welsh Government will undermine the Diamond reforms and increase the cost of part-time courses? kirsty williams am: Let's be absolutely clear what this Government has done for part-time students. We are unique, Janet: unique in the UK and, I believe, unique in Europe, in the parity of the support that is available for full-time and part-time students. So, Welsh part-timers have something that they do not get if they are in England or if they're in Scotland. It's too early to have definitive figures for the impact of Diamond on the number of people who are undertaking part-time study. I don't want to get into trouble by not having that verified data, and I know Members get testy with me for anecdotal evidence, but I can tell you this: there is one provider that is reporting at this moment a 40 per cent increase in the number of students that are registered to start part-time study with them this year, as compared to last year, and that reflects really, really well, compared to the onward downward trend that we see across the border for part-time. What this means, for us as a nation, is that people are able to take this opportunity to upskill themselves and to be able to develop their qualifications and to be able to move themselves up career ladders, and I think that's such an important economic factor for us. So, rather than feeling doom and gloom about the prospects for the part-time sector, the early indications, at least, show that the Diamond reforms are leading to an increase in demand and, more importantly, an increase in uptakestudents taking advantage of that system to go away and study. Is the Welsh Government able to reassure the committee that its ambitions for the post-compulsory education and trainingreforms are still in line with the original Hazelkorn recommendations, and go beyond the Labour manifesto commitment of simply replacing HEFCW with a new funding body for HE and FE? kirsty williams am: Okay. So, you will be aware, Janet, that the agreement between myself and the First Minister that brought me into the Government and the Government's programme state very clearly about our desire to pursue the recommendations of the Hazelkorn report. I hope, by the end of this week, we will have published the responses to the technical consultation, and we will continue to move forward. And I would argue, certainly, that the reforms that we are intending to implement do go beyond just simply a body that replaces HEFCW and joins in FE. And, as I said, I believe we've had in the region of about 450 responses to the technical consultation and I'm pleased to say that there remains a consensuswe will always have some arguments about the detailsbut there remains a consensus on the direction of travel that we are pursuing. A summary of the consultation responses will be available to Members and will be published by the end of the week. Is the Welsh Government still committed to introducing the PCET Bill before the end of the fifth Assembly, and are you confident this will happen? kirsty williams am: Well, I'm absolutely determined that we will get the PCET legislation on the floor. So, it is a substantial piece of work, but I believe that we are on track to be able to do that by the end of this term. llyr gruffydd am: Can I just pick up on that? , it is going to be a big job, and, clearly, there's a strong focus on creating the commission and putting the structures in place, but, of course, one of the drivers is that we want to effect a cultural change in the way that people perceive post-16 education. When are we going to see this coming forward? Because I think we're putting structures in place, so there's a big discussion about the technical stuff, but I feel there's a bit of a vacuumin terms of the vision. kirsty williams am: Well, I would disagree with you, Llyr, because llyr gruffydd am: Right, okay. kirsty williams am: Well, I would disagree with you because, of course, the technical consultation has followed what we had last year, which was a consultation on the vision, on what we needed to do to bring the sector together beyond just HE and FE, to the inclusion of sixth forms; work-based learning providers; apprenticeships; and bringing all of that together under one body. I believe that that gives us an opportunity to have better strategic planning; to help us prevent duplication; to help us bridge gaps that are not available for learners at the moment. My vision is that it will promote collaboration between institutions rather than simply having the market-based process that we see in other places where there's competition rather than collaboration. I want to see it strengthen links between schools, FE and HE, strengthen links between schools and employers and business, to make sure that we've got better information and advice services so that young people know what their pathways are and can make really informed choices about what's best for them, to help them make them. So, I think: we've done the vision, we're now doing the technical consultation, that will be published by the end of the week, and we'll move forward with our overarching vision that Hazelkorn elaborated and that we are now taking forward. llyr gruffydd am: So, you would be very concerned if FE institutions were saying that we really need to see the vision, that that's the next step, that we really need to understand the vision. As I said, I was with one of our excellent FE leadersjust at the end of last week; it wasn't raised with me then. I think there's a shared understanding of the vision, but I understand and Ido see some nervousness about, actually, in the end, will this just be HEFCW by another name, and, the opportunity for FE, will this be realised in this new body? We need to keep ensuring that, as we go forward and develop the policy, and as we develop, eventually, the legislation, that that parity of esteem and that true equality across all parts of the sector is realised. Your paper to the committee says that there's a need for more analysis and research into the outcomes for learners from different backgrounds. If you don't have the analysis, how can you be sure that the investment that's being made by the Welsh universities is actually going to have a positive outcome in the right places and lead to better outcomes for underrepresented groups? kirsty williams am: Okay. Well, of course, that would be one of the duties of the new commission set up as a result of ourpost-compulsory education and training reforms that I would anticipate. The universities are required, under theHigher Education (Wales) Act 2015, to produce fee and access statements, and the 104 million that they have to take off their fees to be able to promote this workthose fee and access plans have to be signed off by the Higher Education Funding Council for Wales as being robust and truly promoting equality of opportunity. We are looking at.It's quite early days, still, for that new regulatory regime to come through, so we ask HEFCW, when I meet with HEFCW, about the adequacy of those plans. That's why we're introducing the Diamond reformsso that those from the poorest backgrounds can be adequately financially supported and are not put off from going to a university. So, for instance, in the FE sector, we're introducing new joint monitoring for outcomes for sixth-form learners and FE learners, because we've never tracked them in the same way. So, we're introducing that now so that we can see the destinations for those two sectors, but the PCETreforms give us an opportunity to do that right across the board. Huw, is there anything else I need to add? huw morris: Well, I'd just reinforce the point the Cabinet Secretary made about the fee and access plans being the vehicle through whichwe get universities to specify what they're going to do, and the funding council tracks that. To make sure that we're doing that in a full and appropriate manner, periodically, we ask for that system to be reviewed. I think it was in 2017 that theWales Institute of Social and Economic Research, Data and Methodsthe research arm of Cardiff Universityreviewed the system and looked at how widening access was being promoted by different institutions and whether that was working in all parts of Wales. The report from that group was considered by one of the sub-committees in HEFCWand they are revising the process as a consequence. So, I think we can be confident that there are ambitious targets that are monitored, and, periodically, the system as a whole is reviewed. michelle brown am: Can you tell us what sort of research and data the universities are basing those access plans on? I assume they'll all have slightly different methodsI appreciate thatbut can you give us any idea of how they actually formulate these access plans? huw morris: So, there are data collected across the UK by a body called the Higher Education Statistics Agency. They produce detailed breakdowns, along with UCAS, of where applicants come from, which institutions did they study at, what courses, what their particular characteristics are, including their socioeconomic status, and that data is then analysed at a UK level and in Wales, through HEFCWand its agents, to track what's happening at different institutions at different stages, not just in terms of who's applying and who gets access, but who progresses and what happens to people once they've graduated. I'm just wondering how that data that's already there differs from the research and analysis that you were talking about in your paper. What specific analysis and research were you referring to in your paper? kirsty williams am: We use the HESA. kirsty williams am: That's shorthandthe HESA data, and institutions use that. This is a source of real concern to me, that Welsh institutions may not be able to have the ready access to that data because of changes the OfS may be making. So, we supplement where we think that there's value to be added in additional breakdowns, or in additional slicing of data and understanding of what is motivating people to come forward. huw morris: And to give you a specific example of that as it applies in north Wales. So, take a university like Wrexham Glyndr University; they have quite a large intake of mature students. The data that's collected and analysed at a UK level tends to look at people who are going into university at a young age, not a mature profile. So, some of the analysis that we do in Walesindeed, the deliberations of the sub-committee that I spoke about earlieris about how do we make sure that those differences in Wales are reflected in the data and reflected in the targets that are set. hefin david am: Cabinet Secretary, are you in favour of more university mergers? kirsty williams am: I wouldn't use the word 'agnostic', but what I'm in favour of is a healthy, strong and sustainable HE sector. If individual institutions wish to collaborate or, indeed, go further to a formal merger then, obviously, that is a matter for them. We're not pursuing or urging a policy of mergers, but, if individual institutions feel that is of benefit to them and their students, obviously, we would have an interest in that and making sure that they were robust plans, but that's a matter for individual institutions. kirsty williams am: Well, again, what HEFCW are interested in is a sustainable HE sector that is strong but, as I said, I do not have a burning desire or a set policy to try and pursue mergers. The reason I say it is because I was kind of on the inside when Cardiff Metropolitan University was under pressure from the then Minister to merge with the University of Glamorgan and Newport. You had the University and College Union and the Minister pushing it; the vice-chancellor of Cardiff Met at the time very much against it. So, do you think that it's really? You're agnostic, but do you think perhaps it's not worth the disruption that can occur to staff and students? kirsty williams am: As I said, Hefin, I have no formal policy for reconfiguration or mergers. Going back to the issue of ITE, a very interesting programme came forward from Cardiff Met and Cardiff University for their ITE provision. So, I'm all for universities and institutions working together, but there's no formal policy. If they see that there is an advantageI would hope for the student first, and, if we put the student at the front of this process, then we would obviously have an interest in that and making sure that that was the right thing to do. hefin david am: Just to be clear, then, that's likely to be a policy for the foreseeable future as well; you're not going to change that view. kirsty williams am: I have no intentions at this stage, but 'Events, dear boy'. [Laughter.] You know, sometimesthere may be a situation that I cannot foresee at this moment that would necessitate, for the benefit of students, the benefit of Wales, a merger. So, never say never, but, at this point in time, I do not foresee us changing that policy. julie morgan am: Yes, just looking back at that time, which I remember very vividly hefin david am: So do I. Do you feel there has been any disadvantage to Cardiff Met because that merger didn't go ahead? kirsty williams am: I, personally, am not awareof any disadvantage to Cardiff Met, but I would recogniseI would absolutelyrecognisefor staff and students caught up in those deliberations and those issues, then that would have had a personal impact on them. In terms of the institution going forward, I'm not aware that they are currently struggling with any disadvantage from that discussion. And, as I said, I'm really heartenedby some of the really interesting collaborative work that Cardiff Met are interestedin doing, and new partnerships and new collaborations between institutions, whether that be Cardiff Unior local colleges, and I think that's to be welcomed. julie morgan am: So, following on from what Hefin said, was it worth all the fuss? kirsty williams am: Well, look, as it's turned out, we have a strong institutionin Cardiff Met, and I think, rather than looking at the past, we need to look at the future. But, of course, there was some reconfiguration and we need to understand any lessons that arose out of reconfiguration, and HEFCW are currently doingsome work, actually, to look at reconfiguration, the experience ofreconfiguration that did happen, and were benefits realisedand what are the lessons that can be learned from that process. So, they are doing a piece of work to reflect, and that will, perhaps, help inform us aswe go forward. hefin david am: I'd just sayJulie Morgan was one of our heroes at the time, I've got to say. If I turn that on its head and have a look at University of South Wales, one of the concerns I'm getting from former colleagues and staff is that the Newport aspectbecause it wasa merger between Newport and the University of Glamorganhas been somewhat denuded by the merger, and the amount of activity in the new Newport campus and elsewhere in Newport has been reduced by the merger. Are you aware of those concerns that staff may have? kirsty williams am: As Isaid, it's not for me to second-guess the judgment of previous Ministers who pursued hefin david am: But it's happeningnow, . Obviously, one campus closed completely, and there are concerns about the level of activity at the new campus. And we continue to discuss with the University of South Wales and the local FE college what offer is available tothe local population, but also the wider contribution that that institution can make to the rest of Wales, and we continue to have conversations with boththe college and the university about utilisationof the facilities in Newport and opportunities that could be made available in Newport. hefin david am: That's interesting, becausethat's the first time I've heard it confirmed from the Government that those concerns that have been raised by former staff and colleagues in Newport are actually echoedby yourself, then. Clearly, going back to the point that I believe Suzy made about geographical coverage, we want to make sure that FE and HE opportunities are available for people throughout Wales, andwe continue to work with providersin that area to explorewhat can be done to enhance the opportunities. hefin david am: And, from a financial point of view, they had 25 million for the merger. Are you satisfied that's value for money, and, at this point in the 10-year plan, that things are going as they should, with incomes being squeezed across the sector? kirsty williams am: Yes. , it's difficult, isn't it, to second-guess what would have happened, what might have happened, if the merger hadn't gone ahead, around the financial stability and sustainability of an institution. How do you prove that, if that hadn't happened, something worse or something bettermight have happened? It's difficult to do that and to second-guess those judgments, but, as I've said, what I am interested in. And I can't change that decision that was made by a previous Ministerit wasn't my decisionbut what I can do is to ensure that any lessons learnt, any evaluation of that particular set of circumstances, can be looked at and can help inform future policy, which is why HEFCW is doing the piece of work. When that's published, you and I will be in a better position to understand whether the aspirations of that particular merger were realised, not realised, and if we were in that situation again, could we do it better next time? hefin david am: Okay, so you'll reflect on that later. At this point in time, you don't have any concerns about the long-term sustainability of the University of South Wales. The Welsh Government's draft outline budget for 2019 states that it will continue to provide 20 million to further and higher education in 2019-20. Can you outline how this will be allocated between HE and FE and if conditions will be attached to the funding? kirsty williams am: Janet, you will have to wait until the end of the month, when the detailed, main expenditure group by main expenditure group lines of the budget are published, otherwise I will be stealing the finance Minister's thunder. There is a process by which the Welsh Government's budget is dealt with, and those details will emerge later on this month. kirsty williams am: But can I just say on conditions? You will be aware that there are conditions attached to Government spend, both in the FE sector and in the HE sector. Those budgets will be subject to those existing arrangements; so, for instance, in the HE sector, the remit letter to HEFCW. We're llyr gruffydd am: Can I just pick up on funding, generally? Sorry. Because, we did talk about HEFCWand part-time funding earlier, and I'm not sure that we addressed the issue of this 12.5 million cut in a specific budget line from HEFCW, because what they've done, if I understand correctly, is that they've put four priorities into one budget line, which includes part-time teaching, and cut that budget line by 12.5 million. Are you not concerned that that'll have an impact on part-time teaching, given that it's such a success story that you're proud of? kirsty williams am: HEFCWhave to take cognisanceof the remit letter, but then, ultimately, they are free to allocate resources as they see fit. What will drive part-time provision is the students taking it up, and universities responding to that desire and that need within their institutions. We're going to move on now to look at the parity of esteem between academic and vocational post-16 education. Welsh Government wants to achieve parity of esteem between academic and vocational education, and I think that's a very laudable aim. Higher apprenticeships are a key part of this, but Estyn's recent inspection found that only four providers from 17 were achieving good outcomes for learners. What action do you propose to take about this, to make sure that those learners have much better outcomes across the board? eluned morgan am: First of all, just to make it clear that that is very much our intention. I think we have got work to do to make sure that we do reach that parity of esteem, but let's be clear that, in relation to these higher level apprenticeships, we were concerned that, actually, we weren't doing as well, perhaps, as we should be, which is why we commissioned Estyn to look at this specifically, and what it was that we were doing well, and what we needed to improve on. One of the things that we found is that we are doing very well in relation to foundation courses in terms of attainmentwe've got 83 per cent attainment levelsbut if you look at that at higher level apprenticeships, then we've got 77 per cent, so what is going wrong there? But, also, it's worth underlining the fact that, actually, we're still miles ahead of England, who are only reaching levels of about 61 per cent. So, we're already doing much better than England, but we're ambitious, and we want to make sure that if we are serious about this parity of esteem, how do we get there if we're not offering the kind of quality that we'd like to see in those higher level apprenticeships? So, some of the recommendations in that report, we'll be taking up. I think we're also very keen to make sure that people don't repeat learning that they've already done. So, there are lots of these recommendations that now we'll set in motion, and I think the important thing for us then is to understand that, in relation to who's doing well and who's not doing well in the FE sector, the bulk of where that finance goes is actually doing quite well. It's pushing some of the private sector providers where we need to actually make sure that the quality is where we want it to be, and is, very importantly, matching the needs of employers. So, we've constantly got to be looking at the courses: are they responding to the needs of the market and what employers are looking for? And that means revising the offer sometimes in terms of the courses. michelle brown am: Where are the difficulties arising? You refer to difficulties arising with the private providers. What are those difficulties? eluned morgan am: Well, some of it is about, perhaps, not giving the kind of guidance that we'd like them to give in-house. So, they're perhaps not doing the kind of on-the-job work that we'd like them to do. So, I think it's making sure that, when they're in the workplace, they are still being pushed to attain those levels. But I think it's clear that what we need to do is to also listen to what the advisory board that we've set up in relation to apprenticeships is also asking us, and we've got the Confederation of British Industry advising us on that as well. michelle brown am: Do you have a service level agreement with the private providers? eluned morgan am: Yes. , the whole thing is under a tender procedure, obviously, and we will be revising that soon. There'll be a new apprenticeship procurement process that we'll be undergoing and starting to look at that process next year. michelle brown am: Would you be willing to share the targets under the SLA with the committee? eluned morgan am: Well, I think the. I can't see that there'd be a problem with that, so I'm sure we could do that, but I think the way to make people move, quite often, is through making sure that you put the finances where they need to be, and then they're likely to shift. And, so, I think, in responding to this Estyn report, we can then build that into the next framework. If we're going to get parity of esteem, we've got to, probably, get more investment in. Could you say why there isn't more investment in degree, and there doesn't seem to be any investment in Master's-level apprenticeships at universities? eluned morgan am: Well, I think we've got to be careful that what happens is that the state doesn't pick up what, currently, people are prepared to pay for themselves, and, so, we've got to just make sure that that balance is right. So, what's happened in England, for example, is lots of people who were previously sitting Master of business administration courses, for example, are now switching into apprenticeship programmes. So, the systemit means that, previously, they were prepared to pay and now the state is paying or the employer's playing it in a slightly different way. So, I think we've got to just be aware about howmaking sure that we don't get employers passing that responsibility that, actually, they have to upskill and to uptraintheir workers and pass it back on to the state, whereas, actually, they need to step up as well as employers. julie morgan am: So, how are you going to judge that? How are you going to tell when, maybe, you should start putting some money in? eluned morgan am: Well, what we are doing is we're putting money into areas where we know there are skills shortages. So, we're focusing where we want those apprenticeshipsand particularly at the higher levelto be. So, that's where we'll be prioritising our funding, and that's what we're doing already. kirsty williams am: And that's for degree-level apprenticeships, not Master's. And then, in terms of getting data, could you clarify the progress on developing outcome and destination data for higher apprenticeships? Your plan seems to suggest thatdata won't be available until 2020-21, at the end of the programme. eluned morgan am: And that's because we're only just starting on this, and it takes a long time for people to complete an apprenticeship. So, we won't have anybody going from the higher level apprenticeship into a destination until around 2021, so there's no point in measuring that until that point. And then, can you tell us when you'll publish Coleg Cymraeg Cenedlaethol's new operational plan to develop post-16 Welsh-medium provision, which was presented during July, and clarify if the plan requires additional funding? eluned morgan am: So, there is a report that was published in July, and we are waiting for the operational actions from that report to be published, probably within the next month. In terms of the implementation of that programme, some of that journey has already begun, so they're not waiting for the report to. We're not waiting for the actions to be very clearly set out; actually, some of that work has been done. I think what's clear, and something that's very much driving me as the Welsh language Minister, is this understanding that you reach 16 and you get this fall off a cliff in terms of the number of people who actually speak and use Welsh. So, that's the thing that we need to address, and that's why moving now into that area of further education is crucial. And the report, written by Delyth Evans, did suggest that we do need to move into this area but, actually, there wasn't necessarily a need for further funding in that area. But it may be something that we will consider, but it's something that we'll try and absorb, perhaps, from within the department. kirsty williams am: A relatively modest amount of money was being made available this year to be able to kick-start some of this work, but we are mindful of the recommendations from the Evans report. So, future allocations will have to reflect the priorities within the implementation plan, and that's not just money that goes directly to ycoleg, but also trying to get better alignment between other budget lines that support the Welsh language, and making sure that all budget lines that could help on this agenda are aligned to the recommendations and the implementation report. Just oncoleg cenedlaethol's extended remit, have you had? I haven't read the Evans report, but is there anything in there about the role of increased use of Welsh in adult community learning, for example? That's a further education pot, isn't it? eluned morgan am: Yes, it is, and we are very much in touch with adult community learning, and they are aware of the responsibilities they have in relation to the Welsh language. suzy davies am: Oh, yes, I don't mean the higher education sector that's taken over responsibility for this; I'm talking about community learning, low level, just having Welsh there. And, you know, as you mentioned yourself, post 16, people stop using it, so getting it in wherever you can as part of a strategy. They're aware of that responsibility and we suzy davies am: They're free to choose partners, then, are they, to help them deliver that? eluned morgan am: And also to work with the new organisation that we've set up to promote the learning of Welsh, in particular, that is based in Carmarthen. So, that's something also that's being driven, and they're working closely, I think, on this. So, for instance, up in Wrexham, if a student has gone into the college to do A-levels, then they may decide to do those A-levels through the medium of English. But if they were previously in a Welsh-medium school, they are actively encouragedindeed, persuadedto do their Welsh baccalaureate through the medium of Welsh. So, they may be doing their A-levels in English, but if they've come from a Welsh-medium school, the college proactively seeks them out and makes sure that there is provision for them to do their Welsh bac qualification through the medium of Welsh, or, for instance, they are working very hard to form tutor groups. So, the tutor groupyou might be doing your qualifications in English, but your tutor group will be a Welsh-medium tutor group, so that you are placedwith other students who have come from Welsh-medium schools, and your tutor does all that tutor work through the medium of Welsh. So, there are other ways in which we can continue to help support children's linguistic ability, even if they have made a decision not to formally study their A-levels, for instance, or a course, through the medium of Welsh, and we're constantly looking at new ways. I think one particular aspect of the marketif we call it that wordthat we're interested in are those students who've been to Welsh-medium schools, but at 16, perhaps, as I say, decide to go to a college. So, for instance, here in Cardiff, looking at childcare, and the opportunityyou know, there's a sector where we know we need a Welsh-medium workforce. kirsty williams am: So, again, it's trying to target those children, and track them from a previous Welsh-medium education into a college, capturing their language skills, and finding ways in which they can use them. Merthyr collegethere's a Welsh-medium champion in Merthyr college actively looking for children who have come from a Welsh-medium background, and they are allocated roles as Welsh-medium champions within the college, to promote. So, there are lots of innovative ways, especially in the FE sector, that they're looking to keep children's linguistic skills relevant, and they're using them, even if they make that decision to switch the language of their tuition. My question was about community learning, where it's essentially older people who perhaps are coming back to education in a way that wasn't as formal as it was before, if I can put it like thatso we don't lose sight of them as well. I've still got an abiding worry that there's a cohort in the middle here of people who we might lose, and maybe pass on bad attitudes towards the Welsh language to their children, despite the fact that those children now have huge opportunities to absorb Welsh language skills and make the most of them. I'd like to ask about the regional skills partnershippartnerships, I should saybecause they are having a direct influence now on courses and provision in FE, and with degree apprenticeships in universities as well. You, I believe, received the Graystone review back in March, so could you tell us a bit about what was in it, and what the recommendations are? eluned morgan am: So, some of the recommendations. He did suggest that, actually, what they need to be producing is much shorter, sharper, focused reports. There was a suggestion of a lack of transparency, in terms of reporting from those regional skills partnerships, and that's obviously something now that we've undertaken to review. And there, I think, is an understanding that what we need to do now is to put in place those changes. But, on the whole, what we've done is to reinforce our commitment to the regional skills partnerships, and in particular now, through allocating 10 million to further education colleges to respond directly to the wishes and the desires of the regional skills partnerships, you can see actually the status of the regional skills partnerships has just grown significantly. So, you've seen quite a dramatic shift, I think, in the respect for regional skills partnerships over the past year. llyr gruffydd am: So, are there any recommendations in terms of governance as well eluned morgan am: Yes. llyr gruffydd am: because, clearly, there may have been concerns about the way that people ended up being members of the partnerships? You touched on transparencyclearly, that's an issue as well. eluned morgan am: So, on governance, I think there was an understanding that that needs to be looked at again, and that we need to get the right people around the table. And what is interesting is, I think, because it was a voluntary approach, because now people can see an outcome, we're getting different people now really showing an interest in being a part of the regional skills partnerships. So, governance is something again we're going to be addressing and following up the recommendations on in that Graystone review. Is there anything to add to that? huw morris: Well, I was just going to say, I don't see why we couldn't share the review with you. llyr gruffydd am: The normal course of action would be, of course, to have published it and then to publish a Government response. Any reason why that wasn't done? I find it quite strange that you're saying that you're actually actioning the report and you still haven't published it. There's nothing to hide here, so why wouldn't we? We're the people who commissioned the report llyr gruffydd am: I'm the one asking the questions. huw morris: May I justsay: we ask a number of people periodically to comment on what we do, and agencies we work with do the same. I don't suppose we'd anticipated there would be the interest in this issue that there is and so, as the Minister said, there's no problem that I can see with that. llyr gruffydd am: And do you have a timeline in terms of by when you want to introduce some of the reforms that you're looking at now, because of this report? eluned morgan am: Some of them have already been introduced, so we're not waiting. The transparency issue that I think there was a bit of concern aboutthat's already been introduced. So, it's just about making sure that people understand what is going on in these regional skills partnerships. I think that's really important llyr gruffydd am: Well, quite, given the influence that they havenow. Just another short one on the regional skills partnerships, really: how effective are they in supporting the planning and delivery of Welsh-medium provision in post-16? eluned morgan am: I think there's more we can do in relation to that. So, if you think about the care sector, for example, what we do need is more peoplewho have those skills to speak through the medium of Welsh in thecare sector. And, coming back to the point that was made earlier, what we're doing now is looking at the curriculum: to what extent can we include? You don't have to do your whole course through the medium of Welsh, but there are aspects that would be very useful. One of the things that the Coleg Cymraeg Cenedlaethol are looking at is building the resources that will be needed in order to mainstream those into, in particular, thosefront-line service areas where we have a skills shortage. Cabinet Secretary, you know thatthis committee has taken a very keen interest in the emotional and mental health of our young people. In the summer, the English universities Minister made an announcement about the development of a new mental health charter. Is Welsh Government expecting Welsh universities to sign up to that charter or are you planning to work on your own? kirsty williams am: Thank you for raising this. I think it's really important that whilst for many, many, many young people moving away from home and starting their degree course is an incredibly exciting time and something they look forward to hugely, it can bring significant stresses with it, especially for first-year students, who, as I said, are moving away, perhaps are suddenly responsible for finances in a way they've never been responsible for, for all the day-to-day living that perhaps they've relied on other people to assist them with. So, it is right that we look at how we can support health and well-being for students, especially mental health and mental resilience. So, I very much welcome the work on the mental healthcharter, and HEFCWare engaged and keeping a very close eye on what's going on to see the opportunities for Welsh universities to participate in that. But this was on a recent agenda item that I had with HEFCW, and indeed with thevice-chancellors, when I met them last week, or the week before last. So, they are developing their own strategic approach to well-being and health for students, which will be underpinned by a co-created action plan with the universities themselves on supporting studentswith mental health problems in particular. So, the strategic approach and theaction plan are being developed by HEFCWat the moment and HEFCWare also meeting with colleagues from England and Scotland to see the opportunities for a universal approach across the UK to supporting students. The universities, when I met with them recently, all shared a commitment to do better in this particular area. One, because it's the right thing to do, but, actually,stopping people from dropping out and not completing their courses obviously is of a financial benefitto the institution. So, it's actually the right thing to do for their students, they want to do it for that reason, but, actually, there is a strong financial underpinning to ensure that students complete their studies. So, it's looking at, again, each university looking at individual approaches of how better they can do that. But it's not just responding to students who become unwell, it'sactually, 'What can we do to in the campus to maintaingood mental health?' So, rather than just trying to fix a problem once it's occurred, it's 'What can we do?' And you'll be aware of individual institutionstaking different approaches. It's not something that we dictate, but individual institutionswhen they do exams, how work is assessed and marked and gradedare taking different steps to promote well-being, as well as then responding to situations where students become unwell. We do know that financial pressures can be a source of huge stress for students, so we are constantly working with the Student Loans Company to make sure that the services that they offer to people are as good as they can be, and that there are no unnecessary delays that, perhaps, put a student under pressure or give students worries about their financial situation. And I would argue our Diamond reforms, which allow studentsaccess to a living wagefor some students, completely by a grant, for some students, a combination of grant and loan, with no expectation atall that your parentswill contribute, which is not the case inother places where there is an expectation of parental contributionthat actually, hopefully, addresses some of those financial worries that some students may have. But I am aware that if people are waiting for their grant or people are waitingfor their payments, that can be a source of stress. Are you able to give us any indication of timescaleby which you'd expect HEFCWand the individual universities to actually have this work in place? kirsty williams am: I'm not sure, but I will write to the committee and let you know. In fact, we can probably provide, from Universities Wales and from the work that's going on centrally, a list ofproposals that are being undertaken. I wanted to ask you about the pay dispute, and I know that you're not the employer, becauseI know that's going to be the first answer kirsty williams am: You're right, that is the first answer. dawn bowden am: But we are in a stalemate here and you clearly have an interest in making sure that this dispute is resolved quicklyin the interest of the students and the reputation of the colleges et cetera, etcetera. When we've seen the teachers' pay settlement, we've seen FE settlements in England and Scotland higher than what'son the table here. And I am concerned, and I do think this is where the Welsh Government does have a role, becauseI am concerned that the employers seem to be using the funding issue as the reason not to have a reasonable settlement with staff. So, they've walked away from the table, they've said, 'One per cent, take it or leave it. Unless Welsh Government gives us any more money, that's the end of that.' And I'm really concerned about that, becausethis is potentially going to have a major impact on whether we can recruitand retain staff in FE colleges. And I look at the college in my constituency, Merthyrcollegeit's a tertiary college, they're providing A-level education across Merthyrand they're astounding results they've been getting as well. It's really: what more do you think you can do as a Government to try to get these parties back round the table and not allow the dispute to become a political football? eluned morgan am: Thanks very much for that. I think, first of all, you're absolutely rightthis is about ColegauCymru's negotiation, but we are keeping a close eye on the situation. I think it's probably worth emphasising that the reason this has come about, or part of the reason, is becauseyou've seen that pay settlement in relation to teachers' pay and we've had the consequential. The people actually providing the same teaching course in a different institution, you can understand why they may say, 'Something needs to change here.' The problem here is that it's about that, actually, that falls to the Welsh Government. Or at least it falls to FE colleges to fund that,and it's up to them to come up with that proposal. I think it's fair to say that we'll wait until they get further along down the line, but we are extremely aware of the sensitivities of the situation. When you say you're keeping a close eye on it, have you actually had conversations with ColegauCymru? Because I note what you just said there:'We'll keep an eye on it and wait and see what's happening.' Well, all the unions are currently consulting. , this isn't something we want in the FE sector, clearly, so is there anything more proactive that Government could actually be doing to try to bring a resolution to this dispute? eluned morgan am: Well, we are listening and speaking to ColegauCymru, and also we're aware of what the unions are saying as well. When they come to a conclusion, and when they come to us and say, 'Look, this is the consequence and this will finish'at this point, we have no idea where that settlement is likely to fall. Yes, we wouldn't expect you to make an announcement on this, because it's happening outside of Government, but there is a principle here, isn't there, in terms of pay equality between schoolteachers and FE? So, would you not wish to see a situation where we do have greater equality in that respect? eluned morgan am: In relation to teaching, I think it's fair to say that we would wish to see pay equality in relation to teaching, yes. You emphasise'in relation to teaching'my next question is that, of course, within FE establishments you have teaching staff and non-teaching staff, and if there was to be some sort of increase, then would you not expect all staff to have that? eluned morgan am: Well, let's seethat's up to ColegauCymruto negotiate and to discuss, so let's see what the outcomes are. llyr gruffydd am: Because some of the non-teaching staff are the lowest paid, as well, aren't they? So, you know. We're aware of what the requests are from the trade union members, and we'll wait to see what they come up with before responding formally. llyr gruffydd am: Could I just briefly as well ask about pensions, because that's coming down the line, potentially, isn't it, and the impact that's going to have on FE? One college was saying it will cost them 1 million if it happens next year. Are you thinking about any steps that you could take to support them, potentially, because obviously this is coming down the line, really, isn't it? eluned morgan am: Well, I think, already, we've got the situation in relation to teachers, and again what we've seen is the consequential and the UK Government honouring that. Again, what we don't have, necessarily, is that money coming down from the UK Government for us to be able to support it in the way that we might like to. It's early days on this, but it's something, again, we're keeping an eye on. llyr gruffydd am: The fundamental question, really, is: if the money doesn't come down the line from Westminster, are you in a position to underwrite that? eluned morgan am: Well, we'll wait until we see that situation arising, but we're aware that that is an issue that we're going to have to deal with in future. lynne neagle am: In relation to the pay dispute, it's the committee's understanding that ColegauCymru's position is that, in order to meet a pay award that is commensurate with schoolteachers, an additional 3.5 per cent or 10.1 million is needed. Are you aware of that being their position? eluned morgan am: We are aware of their position, yes. hefin david am: You will have had, Cabinet Secretary, a letter fromProfessor Colin Riordanon 26 September regarding essay mills, in which he refers to the other letter that was sent by him and 39 vice-chancellors regarding essay mills and the fact that it's legalised cheating. In the letterit was actually to methat was copied to you, he says: 'We have requested the UK Government commission the QAA to publish a draft Bill by or before the beginning of the next parliamentary session. We've also requested the Department for Education give support to the establishment of a UK centre for academic integrity, which would research, analyse and combat academic misconduct. Any support that the Welsh Government can provide in this regard will also be appreciated, so I'm copying this letter to the Cabinet Secretary for Education.' Can you just giveme your opinions on that, please? kirsty williams am: I think 'legalised cheating' is a polite way of describing what goes on. My officials have been in touch with their counterparts in the UK Government to see if we can co-ordinate a UK approach, which I think is necessary. I don't think there's any merit in us trying to do this on our own; it would be pointless. I hope that we can agree a formal approach as quickly as possible, and I will take every opportunity. We're trying to establish a meeting with the UK Minister for HE before Christmas, and I will take every opportunity that I can to ensure that we can take some very, very strong action in this regard. I want people who attend our universities and who work hard to achieve the grades that they get not to be disadvantaged by people who look to find an easy way out and are not willing to put. I think it undermines the individual effort of individual students who are doing the right things, as well as the integrity of our system. I'm proud of the quality of the system that we have in the Welsh HE sector, and I want that maintained. And in addition to the specifics regarding the quality assurance agency and the proposedcentre for academic integrity, let's be clear: what we're talking about it outlawing those websitesthat offer to write essays for cash. [Laughter.]My understanding is hefin david am: Well, they get through the system and they guarantee. The websites, and I've experienced this, and I mentioned it in First Minister's questions kirsty williams am: You did. hefin david am: The websitessay to you, 'Unlessyou tell anyone, you won't get caught', and students are believing that. kirsty williams am: Absolutely, and, unlike you, I have no experience of this myself hefin david am: Well, I have experience of it. [Laughter.] kirsty williams am: I'm so old, Hefin, that such internet sites didn't exist when I was a student. [Laughter.] But, you know, I'm sure you listened to it too: a recent article, on a radio station, where, actually, it was an experiment just like you dida student deliberatelywent through this process to expose, but, actually, what they got in return wasn't even very good. It was a particularly poor essay on the portrayal of women in Victorian literature, so they weren't even getting very good value for their money. [Laughter.] But, clearly, this is a terrible and abhorrent practice in our system, and, as I said, I will do everything that I can to work with colleagues across the United Kingdom to find a solution to this. If I thought it would help if we did it on our own, we could do that, but it won't help if we act unilaterally. hefin david am: And justfinal questionwith regard to the representations you've made, do you feel that the UK Government is open to this course of action? kirsty williams am: Well, officials are the ones who have had those direct, face-to-face conversations, rather than me. Huw, would you like to comment? huw morris: We haven't had anything formally, but I understand from what I've heard in England that there is an interest to do something. Whether that will take the form of a Bill in the timescale you've outlined, I'm not sure, but as the Minister said, we'll be exploring that with officials through the ministerial meetings. Well, can I thank you all for attending and for answering all our questions? As usual, you'll have a transcript to check for accuracy following the meeting, but thank you very much for your time. Paper to note 1 is a letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Education regarding eligibility criteria for free school meals. Paper to note 2: a letter from the Minister for Children, Older People and Social Care on the Childcare Funding (Wales) Bill. Paper to note 3: also from that Minister, which is his response to the Constitutional and Legislative Affairs Committee on the Bill. And the final paper to note is from Mind Cymru regarding the task and finish group on a whole-school approach to mental health, and I will update Members on that when we go into private.Happy to note those? Item 4, then: can I propose, in accordance with Standing Order 17.42, that the committee resolves to meet in private for the remainder of the meeting? Are Members content? Thank you.
phd e: So it 's well , it 's spectral subtraction or Wiener filtering , depending on if we put if we square the transfer function or not . phd e: And then with over - estimation of the noise , depending on the ,  the SNR , with smoothing along time , smoothing along frequency . phd e: And , the best result is when we apply this procedure on FFT bins , with a Wiener filter . phd e: So it 's good because it 's difficult when we have to add noise to to to find the right level . It 's the same , idea but it 's working on mel bands , and it 's a spectral subtraction instead of Wiener filter , and there is also a noise addition after , cleaning up the mel bins . professor b: if you look at databases , the , one that has the smallest smaller overall number is actually better on the Finnish and Spanish , but it is , worse on the , Aurora phd e: It 's worse on professor b:  on the , TI - TI - digits , phd e: on the multi - condition in TI - digits . But , when you say u  , unified do you mean , it 's one piece of software now , or ? phd e: So now we are , yeah , setting up the software .  , and we phd a: So what 's what 's happened ? I think I 've missed something . So a week ago maybe you weren't around when when when Hynek and Guenther and I ? phd c: Hynek was here .  And then if I summarize somebody can tell me if I 'm wrong , which will also be possibly helpful . phd e: p - p - p professor b: We ,  we looked at ,  anyway we after coming back from QualComm we had , you know , very strong feedback and , I think it was Hynek and Guenter 's and my opinion also that , you know , we sort of spread out to look at a number of different ways of doing noise suppression . professor b: we had a long discussion about how they were the same and how they were d  , completely different . professor b: And , fundamentally they 're the same sort of thing but the math is a little different so that there 's a a there 's an exponent difference in the index you know , what 's the ideal filtering , and depending on how you construct the problem . professor b: And , I guess it 's sort you know , after after that meeting it sort of made more sense to me because  , if you 're dealing with power spectra then how are you gonna choose your error ? And typically you 'll do choose something like a variance . Whereas when you 're when you 're doing the the , looking at it the other way , you 're gonna be dealing with signals phd c:   professor b: and you 're gonna end up looking at power  , noise power that you 're trying to reduce . And so , eh so there should be a difference of you know , conceptually of of , a factor of two in the exponent . professor b: But there 're so many different little factors that you adjust in terms of of , over - subtraction and and and and and so forth , that arguably , you 're c and and and the choice of do you do you operate on the mel bands or do you operate on the FFT beforehand . There 're so many other choices to make that are are almost well , if not independent , certainly in addition to the choice of whether you , do spectral subtraction or Wiener filtering , that , @ @ again we sort of felt the gang should just sort of figure out which it is they wanna do and then let 's pick it , go forward with it . And and , we said , take a week , go arm wrestle , you know , grad d: Oh . professor b: And and so they so instead they went to Yosemite and bonded , and and they came out with a single single piece of software . phd a: So so you guys have combined or you 're going to be combining the software ? professor b:  . phd c: Well , the piece of software has , like , plenty of options , phd e: Oh boy . professor b: Well , that 's fine , but the thing is the important thing is that there is a piece of software that you that we all will be using now . phd e: Well , if we want to , like , optimize different parameters of phd c: Parameters . But , still so , there will be a piece of software with , will give this system , the fifty - three point sixty - six , by default and professor b:   phd a: I I I don't have a sense of phd e: It 's just one percent off of the best proposal . professor b: So it so , it 's it it 's not using our full bal bag of tricks , if you will . professor b: And , and it it is , very close in performance to the best thing that was there before .  , but , you know , looking at it another way , maybe more importantly , we didn't have any explicit noise , handling stationary dealing with e e we didn't explicitly have anything to deal with stationary noise . phd a: So will the neural net operate on the output from either the Wiener filtering or the spectral subtraction ? Or will it operate on the original ? professor b: Well , so so so argu arguably , what we should do  , I gather you have it sounds like you have a few more days of of nailing things down with the software and so on . But and then but , arguably what we should do is , even though the software can do many things , we should for now pick a set of things , th these things I would guess , and not change that . And I think , you know , that our goal should be by next week , when Hynek comes back , to  , really just to have a firm path , for the you know , for the time he 's gone , of of , what things will be attacked . But I would I would I would thought think that what we would wanna do is not futz with this stuff for a while because what 'll happen is we 'll change many other things in the system , phd a:   professor b: and then we 'll probably wanna come back to this and possibly make some other choices . phd a: But just conceptually , where does the neural net go ? Do do you wanna h run it on the output of the spectrally subtracted ? phd e: Mmm . professor b: Well , depending on its size Well , one question is , is it on the , server side or is it on the terminal side ?  , if it 's on the server side , it you probably don't have to worry too much about size . So the issue is is , for instance , could we have a neural net that only looked at the past ? phd a: Right . professor b: what we 've done in  in the past is to use the neural net , to transform , all of the features that we use . This is essentially ,  I guess it 's it 's more or less like a spee a speech enhancement technique here phd a:   professor b: right ? where we 're just kind of creating new if not new speech at least new new FFT 's that that have you know , which could be turned into speech  , that that have some of the noise removed . professor b: after that we still do a mess of other things to to produce a bunch of features . And then the the way that we had it in our proposal - two before , we had the neural net transformed features and we had the untransformed features , which I guess you you actually did linearly transform with the KLT , phd e: Yeah . professor b: but but but  , to orthogonalize them but but they were not , processed through a neural net . And Stephane 's idea with that , as I recall , was that you 'd have one part of the feature vector that was very discriminant and another part that wasn't , phd a:   professor b: which would smooth things a bit for those occasions when , the testing set was quite different than what you 'd trained your discriminant features for .  , y you know , that 's still being debated by the by people in Europe but , no matter how they end up there , it 's not going to be unlimited amounts , phd a: Yeah . And I think those that we last time we agreed that those are the three things that have to get , focused on . phd a: What was the issue with the VAD ? professor b: Well , better ones are good . phd a: And so the w the default , boundaries that they provide are they 're OK , but they 're not all that great ? professor b: I guess they still allow two hundred milliseconds on either side or some ? Is that what the deal is ? phd e:   phd e: And all the speech pauses , which is Sometimes on the SpeechDat - Car you have pauses that are more than one or two seconds . And , yeah , it seems to us that this way of just dropping the beginning and end is not We cou we can do better , I think , phd a:   phd e: because , with this way of dropping the frames they improve over the baseline by fourteen percent and Sunil already showed that with our current VAD we can improve by more than twenty percent . phd e: So , our current VAD is is more than twenty percent , while their is fourteen . And another thing that we did also is that we have all this training data for let 's say , for SpeechDat - Car . And if we just take only the , VAD probabilities computed on the clean signal and apply them on the far - field , test utterances , then results are much better . phd e: So it means that there are stim still phd a: How how much latency does the ,  does our VAD add ? phd e: If if we can have a good VAD , well , it would be great . phd a: Is it significant , phd e: right now it 's , a neural net with nine frames . phd a: or ? phd e: So it 's forty milliseconds plus , the rank ordering , which , should be phd c: Like another ten frames . professor b: So what 's the ? If you ignore  , the VAD is sort of in in parallel , isn't i isn't it , with with the ?  , it isn't additive with the the , LDA and the Wiener filtering , and so forth . phd c: So we  , if so if we if so which is like if we reduce the delay of VA So , the f the final delay 's now ba is f determined by the delay of the VAD , because the LDA doesn't have any delay . So if we re if we reduce the delay of the VAD , it 's like effectively reducing the delay . phd a: How how much , delay was there on the LDA ? phd c: So the LDA and the VAD both had a hundred millisecond delay . So and they were in parallel , so which means you pick either one of them phd a: Mmm . professor b: And there didn't seem to be any , penalty for that ? There didn't seem to be any penalty for making it causal ? phd c: Pardon ? Oh , no . phd c: Or something like that professor b: And he says Wiener filter is is forty milliseconds delay . phd a: What amount of latency are you thinking about when you say that ? professor b:  . professor b: You know , they 're saying ,  one group is saying a hundred and thirty milliseconds and another group is saying two hundred and fifty milliseconds . phd a: Were you thinking of the two - fifty or the one - thirty when you said we should have enough for the neural net ? professor b: Well , it just it when we find that out it might change exactly how we do it , is all . professor b: how much effort do we put into making it causal ?  , I think the neural net will probably do better if it looks at a little bit of the future . And , you know , how how much time should we put into into that ? So it 'd be helpful if we find out from the the standards folks whether , you know , they 're gonna restrict that or not . But I think , you know , at this point our major concern is making the performance better and and , if , something has to take a little longer in latency in order to do it that 's you know , a secondary issue . professor b: But if we get told otherwise then , you know , we may have to c clamp down a bit more . phd c: So , the one one one difference is that was there is like we tried computing the delta and then doing the frame - dropping . phd c: The earlier system was do the frame - dropping and then compute the delta on the professor b:  - huh . So , yeah , what we do is we compute the silence probability , convert it to that binary flag , professor b:  - huh . phd c: and then in the end you c up upsample it to match the final features number of phd e:   phd a: Did that help then ? phd c: It seems to be helping on the well - matched condition . And it actually r reduced a little bit on the high mismatch , so in the final weightage it 's b b better because the well - matched is still weighted more than professor b: So , @ @  , you were doing a lot of changes . Did you happen to notice how much , the change was due to just this frame - dropping problem ? What about this ? phd c: y you had something on it . Sometime we we change two two things together and But it 's around maybe it 's less than one percent . But like we 're saying , if there 's four or five things like that then pretty sho soon you 're talking real improvement . Well , we can do the frame - dropping on the server side or we can just be careful at the terminal side to send a couple of more frames before and after , and So . phd a: You have ,  So when you  , maybe I don't quite understand how this works , but , couldn't you just send all of the frames , but mark the ones that are supposed to be dropped ? Cuz you have a bunch more bandwidth .  , it it always seemed to us that it would be kind of nice to in addition to , reducing insertions , actually use up less bandwidth . phd a: If the net 's on the server side then it could use all of the frames . It 's , like , you mean you just transferred everything and then finally drop the frames after the neural net . Right now we are  , ri Right now what wha what we did is , like , we just mark we just have this additional bit which goes around the features , saying it 's currently a it 's a speech or a nonspeech . phd c: So there is no frame - dropping till the final features , like , including the deltas are computed . phd c: And after the deltas are computed , you just pick up the ones that are marked silence and then drop them . professor b: So it would be more or less the same thing with the neural net , I guess , actually . Yeah , that 's what that 's what that 's what , this is doing right now . So , what 's ,  ? That 's that 's a good set of work that that ,  phd c: Just one more thing . Like , should we do something f more for the noise estimation , because we still ? professor b: Yeah . I tried just plugging the , Guenter noise estimation on this system , and it  , it got worse . professor b: it does seem like , you know , i i i i some compromise between always depending on the first fifteen frames and a a always depending on a a pause is is is a good idea .  , maybe you have to weight the estimate from the first - teen fifteen frames more heavily than than was done in your first attempt . No , do you have any way of assessing how well or how poorly the noise estimation is currently doing ? phd e: Mmm . phd e: We don't have nothing that phd c: Is there was there any experiment with ? Well , I I did The only experiment where I tried was I used the channel zero VAD for the noise estimation and frame - dropping . So I don't have a I don't have a split , like which one helped more . phd c: So , that 's the professor b: So that 's something you could do with , this final system . professor b: If it 's , you know , essentially not better , then it 's probably not worth phd e: Yeah . It 's , like , ev even even if I use a channel zero VAD , I 'm just averaging the the s power spectrum . But the Guenter 's argument is , like , if it is a non - stationary segment , then he doesn't update the noise spectrum . So , th the Guenter was arguing that , even if you have a very good VAD , averaging it , like , over the whole thing is not a good idea . phd c: Because you 're averaging the stationary and the non - stationary , and finally you end up getting something which is not really the s because , you anyway , you can't remove the stationary part fr  , non - stationary part from the signal . So , that 's so that 's still a slight difference from what Guenter is trying  professor b: Well , yeah . And and also there 's just the fact that , eh , although we 're trying to do very well on this evaluation , we actually would like to have something that worked well in general . And , relying on having fifteen frames at the front or something is is pretty phd c: Yeah , yeah .  , it 'd certainly be more robust to different kinds of input if you had at least some updates . What what do you ,  what do you guys see as as being what you would be doing in the next week , given wha what 's happened ? phd c: Cure the VAD ? phd e: Yeah . phd e: So , should we keep the same ? I think we might try to keep the same idea of having a neural network , but training it on more data and adding better features , I think , but because the current network is just PLP features . phd e: There 's no RASTA , no phd a: So , I I don't remember what you said the answer to my , question earlier . Will you will you train the net on after you 've done the spectral subtraction or the Wiener filtering ? professor b: This is a different net . phd c: So we have a VAD which is like neur that 's a neural net . phd c: So , right now we have , like ,  we have the cleaned - up features , so we can have a better VAD by training the net on the cleaned - up speech . So it 's , like , where do we want to put the VAD ?  , it 's like phd a: Can you use the same net to do both , or ? phd c: For phd a: Can you use the same net that you that I was talking about to do the VAD ? phd c:   phd c: So the net the final net  , which is the feature net so that actually comes after a chain of , like , LDA plus everything . And and you can actually do it for final frame - dropping , but not for the VA - f noise estimation . professor b: You see , the idea is that the , initial decision to that that you 're in silence or speech happens pretty quickly . phd a: Cuz that 's used by some of these other ? professor b: And that Yeah . And that 's sort of fed forward , and and you say " well , flush everything , it 's not speech anymore " . professor b: it is used ,  Yeah , it 's only used f Well , it 's used for frame - dropping . professor b: because , you know , there 's if you have more than five hundred milliseconds of of of nonspeech then you figure it 's end of utterance or something like that .  , keeping the same method but but , seeing if you cou but ,  noise estimation could be improved . And then , later on in the month I think we wanna start including the neural net at the end . phd a: So , Hynek is coming back next week , you said ? professor b: Yeah , that 's the plan . professor b: I guess the week after he 'll be , going back to Europe , and so we wanna phd a: Is he in Europe right now or is he up at ? professor b: No , no .  , the idea was that , we 'd we 'd sort out where we were going next with this with this work before he , left on this next trip .  , Barry , you just got through your quals , so I don't know if you have much to say . No , just , looking into some some of the things that , John Ohala and Hynek , gave as feedback , as as a starting point for the project . In in my proposal , I I was thinking about starting from a set of , phonological features , or a subset of them . grad d: He said , these these phonological features are are sort of figments of imagination also . grad d: Ye professor b: But we don't have too much trouble recognizing synthetic speech since we create it in the first place . grad d: just looking at the data and seeing what 's similar and what 's not similar . grad d: So , I 'm I 'm , taking a look at some of , Sangita 's work on on TRAPS . She did something where ,  w where the TRAPS learn She clustered the the temporal patterns of , certain certain phonemes in in m averaged over many , many contexts . grad d: And , so , those are interesting things to phd a: So you 're now you 're sort of looking to try to gather a set of these types of features ? grad d: Right . grad d: you know ? A a a set of small features and continue to iterate and find , a better set
lynne neagle am: Good morning, everyone, and welcome to this morning's Children, Young People and Education Committee. I'm very pleased to welcome Kirsty Williams AM, Cabinet Secretary for Education; Steve Davies, director of the education directorate; and Ruth Conway, deputy director, support for learners division. Welcome to all of you, and thank you for your attendance and also for the paper that you've provided in advance. If you're happy, we'll go straight into questions, and the first questions are from Llyr Gruffydd. I just want to start by asking some questions around the targeting of the pupil development grant because, clearly, we've had a lot of evidence around this apparent blurring of eligibility to an extent. I'm just wondering how comfortable you are that the money is being targeted appropriately because, clearly, it's being targeted more widely than just those eligible for free school meals, from some of the evidence we've had, but also that it seems to be predominantly focused on low-attaining freespupils who are eligible for free school meals. I think it's important to be absolutely clear that when it comes to individual interventions, those individual interventions should only be targeted at those children who are eligible for free school meals. But in some cases, schools may use their PDG funding to provide a universal intervention, but we would want toin challenge advisers' discussions in schoolswe'd want to have evidence that that universal intervention would have a disproportionate effect on the outcomes for children on free school meals. So, for instance, if I give you an example in your own region, Llyr: at Brynteg County Primary School in Wrexham, if you look at that primary school in Wrexham, their results for free-school-meal children at the end of their primary school period in school are equivalent to their non-free-school-meal counterparts. One of the things that they've used their PDG for is to really focus on the concept of growth mindset in school. So, that's a universal thing that they've trained all the teachers in, but what we know is that that has a disproportionate effect on those children who are on free school meals. So, if you're familiar with the concept of a growth mindset, it's about really challenging learners to think that, 'I can do things. If sometimes I fail, I pick myself up, I'm more resilient.' Now, that has been, as I said, trained to all the teachers in the schoolit's an ethos for the whole schoolbut we have seen that the impact on the free-school-meal children has been even greater, and now they're at the same level. Individual intervention per child has to be targeted at those children who are eligiblefor free school meals, but sometimes a school will employ a whole-school approach to train their staff, for instance, and that, then, has to demonstrate it has a disproportionate effect on free school meals. So, growth mindset; it may be attachment disorder training for staff, for instance, where we know it's of benefit to everybody, but will have particular benefits for that cohort of students. With regard to more able and talented, you know, Llyr, that this is an area of concern for me, generally, within the Welsh education system; that we've not been particularly good at identifying, supporting and driving attainment for those children. I'm absolutely clear that PDG needs to be used for those children who are eligible to drive potential, whatever the potential of that child is, including more able and talented. And again, I'll give you an example that has been seen as good practice in Pembrokeshire: a window on the world bus, again paid for by schools. kirsty williams am: Oh, you've heard about it; well, it's a really good example the window on the world. And, again, that's very much targeted at raising aspirations and giving children who are more able and talented, who are eligible for PDG, those experiences,and to really push them. So, yes, I'm absolutely clear that PDG shouldn't just be seen to be getting individuals to the average. For those children who are more able and talented, it should be used to support them llyr gruffydd am: And we all share those aspirations, I'm sure, and you pointed to examples of good practice, but of course, it's not universal, is it, so what I'm asking is: do you think that the guidance is sufficient as it is? Do you think that there's a great enough awareness of how the PDG should be used at the coalface? And also, are you confident that consortia and others have the measures in place to be able to demonstrate thatit is being used properly? kirsty williams am: I think, if we look at what Estyn has said about PDG, it does actually recognise that the PDG is being used to push more able and talented children, but as always with the system, Llyr, it's whether we can be sure that that is strategic and that it's happening across all of our schools. So, you're llyr gruffydd am: But not just in relation to more able and talented, I'm referring to the eligibility and the targeting. You'll be aware that, on the advice of Sir Alasdair, we have employed and appointed new PDG regional advisers, and I think their role is going to be absolutely crucial in spreading that good practice across the region, whether that's use of PDG for more able and talented, or ensuring that PDG is used in the appropriate way. And obviously, we have been very clear with regional challenge advisers, in the relationship and the conversations they're having with individual schools, that they're really challenging their schools about the use of PDG, not just in terms of targeting, but the programmes, what the money is being spent on, whether there is an evidence base for that and whether we are clear on impact. So, I think the new regional advisers are going to be crucial in enabling us to ensure more consistent practice across the regions. llyr gruffydd am: So, are you content that eligibility for free school meals is the best measure, really, of identifying which pupils to target? kirsty williams am: Llyr, in the absence of anything better. I'll be the first person to say that maybe it's not as absolutely focused, but in the absence of anything different to identify a proxy for need, I think it's probably the best thatwe've got at present. Some of the policy levers in this area are out of my hands, so if we look at the roll-out of universal credit, for instance, we've got officials working very hard at the moment to try and understand what universal credit is going to mean and where we are going to be able to identify relative need, going forward. We haven't had any additional resource as a result of this, but we're very mindful that, potentially, this has an impact, going forward. And, officials are working all of the time, I must say, in conjunction with the department in England, to understand their thinking in this area so that we are in a position to make some decisions about what a notional eligibility for free school meals will look like going forward, but before I make any decisions, I want to assure everybody thatthere will be a full public consultation on that. Finally for now, on this issue of once a year, in January, if you're eligible for free school meals, then you're in thatgroup for that year. We've had some quite strong evidence about how difficult that makes longer term planning for a number of schools and we've also been pointed in the direction of what's happened in England with the Ever 6, and I'm just wonderingwhether you're giving any thought to maybe changing that a little bit. In conversations with Alasdair, who is our independent adviser on this agenda, and individual schools, we're actively giving thought to greater flexibility and maybe longer term projections, so that schools know, for a number of years ahead, what their allocation will be. There are advantages to that system, because you could give that flexibility, you could give that long-term approach, but then, how do you make that responsive if a school suddenly has more children? We do know that, actually, the number of free-school-meal pupils is dropping. But there can be changes, you know, regional working in areas of north Wales in tourism, or maybe in other areas at Christmas time, parents are able to get a period of work.So, how can we create a more flexible system? We're actively looking at that at the moment. I wouldn't use it as an Ever 6concept, but as an 'Ever 2' concept. We have looked at Ever 6,and I'm going to be absolutely blunt with you: to introduce an Ever 6concept for Wales would mean in the region of identifying an additional 40 million. I'm going to be absolutely straight and blunt with you: we're not in a position at the moment to be able to identify an additional 40 million to introduce an Ever 6. In fact, we'll be having a discussion later on today about decisions, going forward, for the next two years. darren millar am: It's just a very brief point in response to the 40 million price ticket that you just put on that. That's, of course, assuming that you maintain the current level of PDG,yes? So, if you reduced the level of PDG slightly, but made it available to more individuals, if you like, via allocating it in a different way, then that 40 million price ticket wouldn't be there, would it? kirsty williams am: I was asked a question about had I everconsidered an Ever 6. We could, indeed, change the way in which we allocate PDG money, but we have to do it within the envelope that is available to me, over 90 million. That's a significant level of investment, but, of course, as always, Darren, we could cut the amount per pupil, but that might have quite challenging swings in allocations. What we have donebecause what I am clear on is that there was evidence to suggest that in the secondary sector, a great deal of PDG was being focused on years 10 and 11, especially year 11, in catch-up provision, and you'll be aware, because we've said this in evidence to the committee in the papers, we've set a challenge to secondary schools to say, 'Actually, the majority of your PDG allocation has to be used in key stage 3.'Now, we have to balance the needs, the moral hazard of turning round to children in years 10 and 11 and saying, 'We'renot going to provide catch-up opportunities for you,'because, clearly, those children need that support. But the evidence and the advice that we're receiving is: actually, strong focus on early years, primary and key stage 3, if we get that right, should negate the need for spending money on catch-up at years 10 and 11. That's why we, in our advice to local authorities and schools, say that we want to see evidence that they're spending this money earlier on in a child's career, rather than just a scramble at year 11 to say, 'Right, we've got to get you through your exams.' darren millar am: Okay, but have you actively considered, then, reducing the level you have? kirsty williams am: We've ruth conway: SorryI was just going to say that one of the things is looking at the scope of the definition,and I think it's about being more flexible with the definition, rather than reducing the amount per head. If we can go on, then, to talk about some of the practical uses of the PDG, you write in your written paper that 'the majority of schools are makingwell thought out and appropriate decisions' on how to use it. But Estyn reported that only two thirdsof primary and secondary schools make effective use of the PDG. Given that we've had it now for six years, would you not have expected there to be a higher level of schools actually making good use of that funding? kirsty williams am: Well, to flip it on its head, the vast majority of schools, as identified by Estyn, are using this money to good effect. So, that's the way I like to see itthat the vast majority of schools are doing well. What Estynhas also indicated is the intrinsic link here to leadership within individual schools, and as you'll be aware, leadership, improving capacity in leadership and developing leadership talent in the Welsh education system is a key priority for me in our national mission. I think we are seeing, increasingly, more and more schools understanding how best to deploy that money for best effect for students. So, if we're honest, when PDG first started, I think, in some schoolsit was spent on investing in tracking of children, because they'd never thought about tracking these children, they didn't have systems in place to look at the performance of these children, and to have a system in place. So we've moved now from spending money on the infrastructure around support for FSM children into actual inputs in terms of teaching and learning. We're also seeing from Estyn that, actually, in terms of money following the evidence of what we know works, Estyn says that PDG is probably the best example of schools following tried and tested and evidence-based interventions to deploy the money. But clearly we want all of this money to be deployed as well as it can be, and again we come back to the decision I've made to appoint regional PDG advisers so that we can get that better consistency of approach. We are, in the discussions that I have with the regional consortia about how they challenge individual schools on usage, looking for very clear evidence of schools using the Sutton Trust toolkit, and we could have a discussion about whether that's the right thing, because that's on my mind too. But we want to see schools demonstrating their evidence base, and if they're not, if a school isn't doing that, okay, so demonstrate to us why you've made those decisions and, crucially, what are you doing as the school to judge whether that decision is actually making a difference for your individual pupils. So, if you're moving away from tried and tested interventions, what we know works, if you're doing something different with your money, okay, you need to justify that and you need to explain how you're going to demonstrate impact. But I think what we're seeing is increasing good practice in this area as the PDG develops and as our understanding of our school-to-school working in our self-improving school system also develops. llyr gruffydd am: You mentioned some schools will be moving from the tried-and-tested interventions, really, and I'm just wondering to what extent that evolution of use of PDG is being driven by cuts to core funding. kirsty williams am: No, I don't think it's being driven by cuts to core funding. One of the biggest impacts of PDG has not beenwell, I suppose it isthe money in itself, because the money has concentrated the minds, hasn't it? So, one of the most important things that PDG has done is highlight the importance of this agenda within schools, and really raise this up in the thinking of leadership and senior management teams in our schools, and has driven a focus on scrutiny and accountability in the systems that are working with our schools. I think the changing use of PDG reflects the journeys that schools have been on, some of them from a very low base where this was not a priority for them, to better understanding, and as research and as intelligence grows over time in this area, both in Wales and outside of Wales, schools are increasingly learning to use that evidence to tailor approaches in their schools. llyr gruffydd am: So you wouldn't accept at all that some of this money's being used to paper over some funding cracks from elsewhere. Because the unions and some others have told us that, whether we like it or not, there is some of that going on. kirsty williams am: As I said, Llyr, we're very clear about the usage that this money can be spent on in terms of individuals or universal application within schools, and that forms an important part of the checks and balances that we have in our system. Can we continue to improve, and ensure that more and more of our schools are employing best practice? Yes, we can, and as I've said, we've taken steps to put in place the infrastructure to support that. mark reckless am: Cabinet Secretary, how would you assess the impact of PDG on attendance and hopefully subsequent engagement with education from children who have free school meals? kirsty williams am: I think what's important to note is that, as Estyn have themselves said, over the period of the last inspection report, we have seen improvements in attendance,but I do think we need to, again, look at how PDG can support this particular agenda. And as always in the Welsh education system, there are some excellent examples of how schools use the money to address this. Ysgol y Preseli in Pembrokeshire is a very good example of how they've deployed their money. Forgive me; I can't off the top of my head remember the name of the primary school I visited, again in north Wales, where the school has proactively used this money, and they actually send teaching assistants out of school in the morning before the start of the school day, and they actually have a walking bus. So, they're proactively going out into the community and making sure that those children are in the classrooms, because the teacher said, 'We recognised we had a problem with attendance. We tried a variety of means of improving that, but in the end we have taken this quite bold stepwe actually send the staff out and they create that walking bus, and they walk the children into school'. They say that they know that, for some of those children, because of the difficult circumstances they and their families are living in, they probably wouldn't be in school if it wasn't for that proactive approach. So, we're looking again at what more we can do to support this particular agenda in terms of improving attendance, because although, again, there are examples of good practice, there is still a gap between the attendance of free-school-meal pupils and non-free-school-meal pupils. And, of course, we can have the best curriculum in the world with really high-quality teaching, but unless the children are in the classes then we're not going to make the difference for them. Whilst that differential exists, then it's going to be hard to close the attainment gap for those children. mark reckless am: I was actually quite shocked just reading in advance of this meeting that the proportion attending 95 per cent or more, who have pretty full attendance, was only 35 per cent for free-school-meal children at level 4, compared to 60 per cent for non-free-school-meal pupils. My colleague here showed me, I think, last week, a graph showing the link between attendance and attainment, in particular. What more can PDG do to deal with it? In the example you give I can see how a school with an awful lot of free-school-meal children could do that, but a lot of the free-school-meal children are actually in schools that don't have that high a proportion of free school meals, where it would be much more challenging to bring in that type of initiative. kirsty williams am: Yes, indeed, and I think it gets more challenging the older the children get. I think it's more difficult to find interventions that are successful higher up, so key stage 4. So, you can do a walking bus with little ones, can't you, but I don't suppose your average 15 or 16-year-old is going to take very kindly to that. But again, we see in Ysgol y Preseli the employment of staff to directly work with families of older children to reinforce the messages around, as you quite rightly say, the linkage between attendance and attainment, and really work with individual families to understand the barriers to attendance: what's going on in the family that is preventing that child from going to school, and what more can the school do to address those situations. But you're absolutely right; there is more that we need to do to address this particular agenda of attainment. steve davies: There is also another very good exampleand I take what you say about where there are small numbersbut in our secondary schools where there are significant numbers, they're investing PDG in resources like a school nurse and a school counsellor, not just to work with the children but link to other agencies on whom the children and the families are dependent to support them in terms of working with schools. So, it's something, particularly in our most challenging areas, where it cannot just be delivered within the school. So, good use of that resource is being made to employ people to support them in those wider areas. To what extent is PDG also used to seek to reduce the higher rates of exclusion for children entitled to free school meals? kirsty williams am: So, if we looked at permanent exclusions, there isn't a differential, but if we look at temporary exclusions, there we see there is a disproportionate number of children on free school meals that are subject to those exclusions. Again, I thinkwhat schools employing best practice understand is that you need a multi-agency approach to supporting that particular child. Some of those exclusions can be as a result of the need to address other issues going on in a child's life. So, this is where we come back to the committee's work, for instance, on mental health and support for children, support for behaviour in school. So, again, it's a multi-agency approach that I think we need, and, in our good schools, our really, really good schools, there's a recognition of that need to have a whole team around a child to support that child in education. So, for those children who do find themselves in education other than at school, we are providing additional support that previously was not available. hefin david am: It appears that the attainment gap at 2017 has actually widened, in spite of PDG levels. So, if you look at itwith the usual caveats about whether you can make direct comparisons on level 2 plus between the exams the year before and the exams that we had last summeron the face of it, the gap has increased. I'm sure we all want to, because I want to, have a discussion about why children on free school meals were less resilient in the exam system last year. But, if we look at the period that we have been employing PDG, over that period, we have seen a narrowing of the gap. So, if we look at where we started from: in 2009, one in five children on free school meals got level 2 plusone in fiveby 2016, we had got that down to one in three. Obviously, there's still a way to go, but, Sir Alasdair, who knows about these things, says that that is a significant improvement.Last year, we got some challenges. We need to understand why that happened, but I do think it's hefin david am: Why, do you think? kirsty williams am: Why, do I think?What I do think is there is no one answer. I think we could look at and we can have discussions around the move from BTEC to science GCSEs. I think we have supplied figures to the committee about the significant change in the number of children on free school meals who weren't doing a single science GCSE and are now doing science GCSEs. Where children have done language and literature, whether that be through the medium of English or through the medium of Welsh, there is more resilience. So, it's that exposure to literacyin all its forms that I thinkcould potentially make a difference. So, I think there's no one answer to why free-school-meal children were not so resilient last year. At my next ministerial policy board, in May, we'll be doing a deep dive into this particular subject. hefin david am: So, to what extent would examboards be responsible for lack of grade stability? kirsty williams am: It could be one of the contributory factors. What I think is important is that there is no one, single reason why there seems to be less resilience in this cohort of children. hefin david am: Will you be speaking to the exam boards about this and raising concerns? kirsty williams am: I have written to Qualifications Wales, we've had discussions about it, but I've asked them to formally submit evidence ahead of my policy board for May, where, as I said, we will be doing a formal, deep-dive discussion across the department about these issues. But, again,Hefin,what we've got to be clear on iswhile we look at overall factors, you know, our overall national statisticwe did see some schools last year whose FSM performance was better than it had been the year before. So, what was it in those schools that enabled those children to do really well, whereas, in other schools, the performance was different? Even in individual cities, you can see a huge variety of performance. So, you could have really high-performing schools with a very small number of the cohort on free school meals. The difference between those performances in a single cityso, that's the same local education authority and the same regional consortiumyou can see a massive change. There's one school I can talk to: their free-school-meal performance is 88 per cent. A similar school in the same city with the same proportion of children on free school meals, their performance is down in the 20 per cents. For me, the challenge is to go into individual schools and understand what was happening in that particular school that ensured that their children did really well. We've got one school in Swansea, their FSM performance at GCSE level 2 outperforms non-FSM pupils. If we take your argument that 2017 was an unusual year and the trends up to 2016 were positive, in a few years' time, when we will be looking back in two years' time, how are we going to measure this progress, say, in 2019? What are we likely to see and what methods are you going to use to measure progress that way? kirsty williams am: Well, you'll be aware that we are moving away from level 2 plus as a performance measure anyway because of the hefin david am: So, what performance measures will you use? kirsty williams am: So, for the lack of sophistication around the level 2 plus, and for the unintended behaviours that that particular performance measure has driven within our schools. What's important to me is that we have a more sophisticated model that looks at school performance for all children. What level 2 plus does is narrow, very much, the focus of schools on an individual part of the cohort, usually the C/D borderline, which is why then we have problems with the number of students getting a B grade or above. Well, if a child gets a C but came to you in year 7 and they were destined to get an E, yes, indeed, a C is a success, because you've moved that child on; but, if that child came to you destined to get an A* and gets a C, then we haven't done a good job by that particular child. So, we need a performance measure that is much more sophisticated, looks at each individual child, tracks that progress, and measures the value added by that school in performance. hefin david am: Last question: therefore, should we have confidence in the data up to 2016? Is there a lack of confidence in that data? kirsty williams am: No, it's not a lack of confidence in the data. What I'm saying is, using that as a performance measure and an accountability measure within our school system may have been right for the time. I think that particular set of performance measures has driven certain behavioursnot because Ministers wanted that to happen, but as an unintended consequence. I think we can work together with our school system, learning the lessons of international best practice, to develop much more sophisticated accountability and performance measures for individual schools, and, I should say, for the Government. So, you will be aware of my intention to issue the first national report card on Government performance later on this year. It's about trying to develop a more sophisticated way, which is in line with our national mission, where every child's education is valued, and where the impact of the school can be tracked more effectively. Can I just ask, Cabinet Secretary, are you still holding on to your target of 37 per cent of free-school-meal pupils achieving the level 2 threshold? kirsty williams am: Well, we're moving away from the level 2 threshold. So, we will want to develop a new suite, in line with our new accountabilitymeasures, as we go forward.So, we will be absolutely continuing to track and evaluate the performance of free-school-meal pupils. When we announce our new accountability measures, I will be in a position to address how we'll measurethe Government'sperformance, and national performance, going forward. But, given the fact that we're movingaway from level 2 plus, then we will need a different set of performanceindicators. The next questions are on looked-after children and adopted children, and I've got questions from Michelle then Mark. mark reckless am: I think my questions are first, but, Michelle, please do correct me if you were planning to come in before. The PDG for looked-after childrendoesn't quite seem to have the degree of visibilityas the PDG for the free-school-meals. I think we had the MORI/WISERD surveyonly 15 per cent of primary schools and 23 per cent of secondaryschools were aware that PDG was targeted at looked-after children. I just wondercan you clarify on the record here what is the role of schools with PDG for looked-after children as compared to the regional consortiain this field? kirsty williams am: Okay. I think that's probably in the nature of the cohort, so, there are more children subject to free school meals than are subject to being looked after. My understanding was that the thinking behind that at the time was around a greater strategic deploymentof that resource and to try and drive a greater impact than how itwas being used previously. We have looked-after children PDG co-ordinatorsthey're in their second year this yearto look at a regional deployment of that resource. And that resource can be done in a variety of ways, through individual allocation to a school to support an individual child, through to capacity buildingfor the whole system. So, for instance, if I give you an example, in Carmarthenshire, there's been a big emphasis on attachmentdisorder and training teachers with regard to the impact of attachment disorder. Carmarthenshire happensto be one of those local authoritiesthat does quite well in terms of attainment for looked-after children. But I have asked officials to give greater scrutiny to how that resource has been used in the last year. Steve, on my behalf, wrote out to the system, setting out our expectations, but also advising them of the fact we will be asking very detailed questions of accountability for that money. So, what has that moneybeen used on and how can you account for the effect? But, Steve, maybe you can give some greater detail. One of the rationalesfor shiftingnot that all the money stays in the region, but having a regional strategicsupportwas that, historically, the money was going directlywith that child to the school. Given the quite often rapid turnover of children in schoolsthe very nature of looked-after children is they do sometimes move through foster parentshistorically, what happened, the money lands in the school, because, at that time in the year, when it's measured, the school gets the money and can spend it on some additional support for staff, but quite often that child moves on to another school and the moneydoesn't transfer. Some schools will go through quite a number of years without havinga looked-after child and will not think strategically, 'How do I need to support them?' So, that was the rationale of the shift. In termsof the implementation of the regional allocation, as of this financial year finishing, we are going into local authorities and regions to evaluate where they've located the resource, what the impact of that resource has been, so that is reinforcedand shared more widely. kirsty williams am: And then, to reassure, it's not just internally that we're looking at this. We have a contract with an external agency to do an evaluation mark reckless am: That's ICF consulting. Yes, so that was done in the autumn of last year, because, as I said, we had concerns about whether this was really having the effect that was intended. So, my expectation is that we will be in a position to receive that report later on this spring, and of course it would be my intention that that report would be made public for people to have a look at what mark reckless am: That was commissioned last autumn kirsty williams am: Yes, in November 2017. kirsty williams am: So, I'm hoping to have that published before the summer recess. I'm very reluctant to say months; I've learnt not to say months, because they move. lynne neagle am: I'm going to go to Michelle now, Mark, because mark reckless am: Sure. lynne neagle am: both of you asked for these questions, and that's what the pre-meeting is for. Would you be open, Cabinet Secretary, to the idea of adjusting the eligibility of the PDG so that pupils who have been looked after or adopted at any point within a previous given period of time would attract the PDG, rather than only if they're looked-after on a one-off date? kirsty williams am: As I said earlier, in questions from, I think it was, Llyr, who was talking about concepts of concepts of Ever 6, we are constantly looking at how we can get that balance between focus and flexibility for this resource. Llyr opened with the question of, 'How can you absolutely ensure that these children are getting the money?', but then there's also a tension about how can you create some flexibility around the school's usage of the grant. Issues around adoption are slightly more sensitive, because we couldn't force a family to tell a school that their child was an adopted child. So, a family may be very open and very keen to explain that to a school, but we can't necessarily track as closely children who have been adopted, especially if that adoption happens before the child goes to school. We can't be in a position of forcing families to disclose this information if they don't want to, but we certainly can, as I say, look to strengthen our monitoring arrangements around PDG support for looked-after children and the impact that that's having. If they don't want to divulge that, it wouldn't be my job to tell a family, 'You have to let us know if your child is adopted.' lynne neagle am: Michelle. The EAS consortium's approach to using the looked-after and adopted PDG is to use it as part of a broader approach targeted at vulnerable learners in general. What are your views on that approach? kirsty williams am: I'm a great believer in if we can get it right for our most vulnerable learners, we'll be getting it right for all of our learners. I gave the example earlier, for instance, of attachment disorder, and, Chair, you will know that I have had conversations. One of the emerging themes for me, as I go around visiting schools, is the impact and the growing awareness and the growing numbers of children who have attachment disorder, and how schools are best able to respond to that in their children. So, for instance, as I said about Carmarthenshire, there's been a huge effort to address that in the school sector in Carmarthenshire. Now, that has a disproportionate benefit for those children, because you're more likely to see attachment disorder in children who are care experienced, because of the nature of the lives that those children have lived, but that doesn't necessarily mean that attachment disorder is exclusively found in those children that are looked after. So, that vulnerable learner, regardless of their background, will benefit from having teachers who are better trained, understanding and have intervention strategies in place to be able to address that need. steve davies: I think it's also important to add that this is not one region's approach; this is across four regions, so the others. For example, ERW have run a significant programme looking at the impact of adverse childhood experiences on pupils, which hasenabled teachers to detect some of the impact of some of those and then considers some of the work they need to do within the school but also with other agencies. kirsty williams am: I was in PilPrimary School recently where they use their PDG, both FSM PDG, and no doubt an element of PDG forlooked-after, for nurture groups. So, for those children who really, really find it very difficult to be in the main classroom, they can have that nurture group experience to address issues around emotional behaviour, feelings, and it gets them in a position where they are able then to join the main classroom because issues around behaviour have been addressed and they're in abetter position to learn. Can I follow up on tracking adopted children? I entirely understand that you can't force parents to disclose that their child is adopted. However, my understanding was that, in England, there was a dataset with social services that was shared with schools in a way that I'm not clear is happening in Wales and how, if at all, that links to the pupil level annual school census data.Perhaps sort of linked to that, isn't there an argument for making the parents of adopted children in the schools, potentially, with adopted children more aware that adopted children whowere previously looked after have this potential grant, and would they not be more willing to disclose this, at least confidentially to the school and Government, if they knew there was this upside of doing so? kirsty williams am: We're actively looking at whether we should try and find a way of collecting this data, with the caveats that I just gave earlier. We can't force parents to divulge information that is a matter for them, nor would I want to. But there is an active discussion going on at the moment about whether we could create a dataset where people divulge this information and we can then track the children through. One of the ways in which we can often encourage take-up, for instance, of free school meals, especially in those communities where there is a sense of reluctance to apply for supporteven though people are entitled to it, there's a reluctance to do it; sometimes we see this in rural areas. Actually, appealing to the parents by saying, 'Actually,this will mean more money for your child's school budget'is a much more compelling reason why people will apply for it then saying, 'Actually, it's going to help you',because they don't want to be seen being dependent, they don't want to be seen being helped.But, if you say to them, 'Actually,do you know that this means more money for your child's school?', they go, 'Oh, all right then, I'll fill in the forms now.'So, you're right, I think there is something that we could do to make parents understand, in the round, that this has an impact. But we are actively looking at and discussing whether we could create a dataset around adopted children and how we can do that in line with data protection and data sharing. One of the things I am concerned about in the performance of looked-after children generally is how we can, across Government, work more closely together. We can't see the educational attainment of looked-after children just being a job of education. Now, officials were at the ministerial advisory group that's chaired by David Melding on prospects for looked-after children. I will be sitting down with David Melding to talk through what more we can do on the education side. I think there's really an appetite between me and the Minister for children to get a closer working relationship on this. We can't expect schools to do it on their own and alone.And there are things that we can do out there in local authorities to help improve outcomes. It's not just about the PDG; it is about, when social services are thinking about a placement,where does the discussion about where children are going to go to schoolwhen does that take place? Do we talk about the placement, move a child and then think, 'Ohmy goodness me, what are we going to do about the schooling?'If you can imagine, the school could have been working really, really hard with a pupil to get them in a good place, to get them being able to access the curriculum, and then social services decide that the placement is being changed. So, a greater involvement in educationand better linked-up working in local authorities will help us with this. If we think we can crack this with just PDG, then we're being delusional. It has to be a cross-government approach at a national level, and at a local government level as well, to get this right. Sometimes, data protectionhow can we break down some of these barriers between, you know, the school doesn't need to, schools shouldn't see, the entire social services report? Well, maybe the school does need to see some of that background information if they're going to have an impact for that child.So, there's more work to do, but it cannot be just the job of education on its own if we're going to make a difference, nor can it just be the job of the PDG to make a difference for those children. julie morgan am: Yes, before I go on to those, I just wanted to support, really, what Mark was saying about adopted children and how important it is, I think, that the adoptive parents feel able to speak to the school and to give information. Because certainly any evidence we've had from adoptive parents, and generally knowing about what adoptive parents do feel, is that they often feel that there's a degree of a lack of sensitivity in the school about the issues of adoption. I would certainly support some move towards ensuring that the atmosphere was open in a way that would encourage them to realise that it would be a help for the children if there was an awareness in the school. kirsty williams am: Yes, and that would chime with what I hear from many adoptive parents. I'm just trying to be sensitive by saying we can't force people to divulge this information if they don't want to. We need to make sure that those parents feel that they can discuss this with school leaders and classroom teachers and explore how best those individual children can be supported, and how best we can support parents. Because, againand I've said this a lotafter the quality of teaching, the second biggest impact on a child's educational outcome will be parental engagement. So, being able to create an environment where adoptive parents feel very confident and able to talk about their children's education is absolutely crucial if we're going to get that parental engagement that we need for all of our children. Going on to looked-after children, you say that the latest data on looked-after children's attainment is extremely disappointing. Can you expand on that and what effect the PDG has had in this result, or not had? kirsty williams am: Well,there's no getting away from it: the way in which we currently measure outcomes for looked-after children, the results are not good enough. That's why officials are engaging with the group that David Melding is chairing, to make sure that education is integral to that group and it's not lost sight of. There's a discussion to be had about the cohort, whether it's right and correct to compare looked-after children to the main cohort, or whether these statistics are useful in any way. Sometimes as wellthis is not to make an excuse because, as I've said in my paper, it's extremely disappointing, but sometimes it can be really difficult. Because the cohort sometimes can be very, very small, it can swing the statistics to look perhaps more dramatic. julie morgan am: I think, generally, when you look at how looked-after children do kirsty williams am: It's not good. julie morgan am: ina much wider evaluation, they're not doing well, are they? kirsty williams am: They're not doing well. So, that's why we've got the review, the independent review, into the impact of the PDG in this area. This is why Steve is doing the work that he is doing with the regional consortia because, clearly, at the moment, we are not doing what we need to do for that particular cohort of children. steve davies: I think we will not move away from the fact that these children need good GCSEs to gain employment, so we'll continue to measure that. I think we need to look at more nuanced evaluations of the data at a lower level. So, for example, there were significant improvements in terms of PDG pupils who got three and four good GCSEs but didn't get past the threshold. That's not to cover anything that is not working in terms of improvement, but we will look at the full range andstill hold on to the factthat we have to look at a measure that relates to the likelihood of these children going on to further education and training. So, is there any way of trying to address this? Is the PDG used for anything to do with exclusions? kirsty williams am: We can look at exclusions. We also have to read across about how the whole system works, not just the PDG element of the system. So, we know, for example, that 66 per cent of looked-after learners have some additional learning need, so we can't just look at it in terms of this particular source of funding; we have to look at it at a wider level of support. So, given that the majority of those children will have an ALN, how can we make sure thatour new ALN legislation and our new ALN regime meets the needs of these children? So, I think what we're looking at, again, is to say that it can't be just the job of the PDG. That's there as an additional level of support, but actually, we've got to get our ALN right. Unless we get our ALN right, lots and lots of these children are not going to get the support that they need day in, day out via that system. We do know that sometimes, if we're not addressing ALN, then we're not addressing behaviour issues that then potentially lead to an expulsion or potentially lead to non-attendance. So, we've got to look at it in the round and recognise the connections between the sometimes quite complex needs that these children have within the school setting, that are not just as a result of the fact that they're looked after; they have other needs as well. Steve is reminding me that that's why well-being is part of the national missionto address issues around supporting children with their well-being, which is a way of keeping them in school. I was just wondering what your assessmentis as to why some schools made progress and others didn't. kirsty williams am: I think we have to recognise that the 39 schools that were part of the programme were in very, very different places. So, I think one of the reasons why some schools did well was because their needs were not so complex, not so deep-seated and a certain level of intervention was enough to get them moving forward. I think, talking to those involvedin the programme, as always, we had some support advisers, challenge advisers working with those schools as part of the programme who were really, really excellent and really good, and were the right fit for the school and really drove the school onwards. We had other people employed in the programme who, perhaps, were less effective at driving change within those individual schools. So, what we have is a mixed bag of performance, again reflecting the very different challenges that those schools were facing, which led them to be chosen for the programme in the first place. One of the other key additional factors was the extent to which there had been recent appointment of a new headteacher to that school just before the programme had started, because kirsty williams am: Leadership is all. I think one of the challenges is that sometimes the time it takes to make changes in leadership can be protracted and can be a barrier, sometimes, to the speed with which you can move. But, for a significant minority of the schools, there had been recent new appointments of headteachers, which was seen to be contributing, when you looked at the evaluation, to the speed with which they were able to engage. llyr gruffydd am: The reason I was asking was I wanted to understand what lessons the Government is taking from that three-year investment, really, and how, maybe, you're applying some of those lessons to your wider school improvement programme. I know Professor Mel Ainscow identified six interconnected lessons, although I also note that the Cabinet Secretary didn't actually meet him for about six or seven months after coming into post. So, I'm just wondering, can you give us confidence that, actually, you are serious about taking lessons from Schools Challenge Cymru and applying them to the wider school improvement agenda? kirsty williams am: Well, absolutely, Llyr. I don't think anything should be read into when I met the individual concerned, because officials were meeting the individual concerned. Individual challenge advisers were meeting with the regions, there was crossover work with the FSM agenda as well, and we are absolutely determined that best practice and those interventions that drove school improvement are embedded in the new support that we have via the regional consortia.It's no coincidence that some of the best people that were employed by Schools Challenge Cymru are now in the employment of our regional consortia. So, those people that were really good and really made a difference don't work for the Schools Challenge Cymruscheme any more, they work for our regional school improvement services. It is absolutely key and crucial to have strong, capable school leadership as a driver for change within the system. We're looking at systems and processes, so, actually, has a school got in place comprehensive systems of tracking and processes within the school?We're looking at the teacher qualityhow can we ensure that we have got consistent strategies in place to drive up pedagogy and teacher quality in the classroom? Collaborative activityagain, absolutely key. A school cannot see itself in isolation, and one of the key themes of the national mission is a self-improving system, so, collaborative working where schools are looking outside of each other, learning from best practice from other schools. So, there are lots of things that we've drawn from the evaluation that you will see as key themes running through the national mission, and, as I said, it's no coincidence that our really good people that were working in Schools Challenge Cymruare now working for the regional consortia, being able to use that expertise not just for a very small proportion of our schoolsbut that expertise is available to all our schools. llyr gruffydd am: Although Estynhas told us, of course, that you can't expect the consortia toreally carry on with that level of intervention and the same kind of intensity as was provided previously, so I'm just wondering kirsty williams am: In what way? llyr gruffydd am: Well, we were told by Estynin evidence that they didn't necessarily think that we could expect the consortia to provide the same type of tailored support, and certainly the level of intensity with the improvement boards and everything kirsty williams am: Well, the improvement boards are carrying on, so the improvement boards still exist, and I wouldnot that I want to argue with Estyn llyr gruffydd am: Well, feel free; this is your opportunity to do so if you kirsty williams am: What I would say is that those improvement boards are staying on, and our schools categorisation system is used to identify the level of support. Now, if you're a red school, that gives you the entitlement to 25 days of support. That is more than you would have got under the Schools Challenge Cymru programme,which would've been 20 days. So, actually, moving to this system allows us to really focus in on those schools that need that intensive level of support. And what's important for me, Llyr,in this, okay, is that those schools are not necessarily just the schools that were in the programme. Our system now of challenge, advice and support allows us to target resources across all of our schools and across all of our sectors, because you'll be aware that Schools Challenge was only available to secondary schools, not available to primary schools. What our system now allows us to do, via the schools categorisation, is to identify schools, wherever they are in Wales and whatever sector they're in, to have that intensive level of support that they need to make improvements. llyr gruffydd am: So, you're confident that that level of momentum is continuing through the consortia that was previously enjoyed by those particular schools, and you're also confident that there is minimal risk that they'll slip back to where they were, potentially, or at least part of the way back. kirsty williams am: Well, actually, there are some really good examples of some of the Schools Challenge Cymruschools making that sustained improvement now that the programme has come to an end. You only have to look at Tredegar, where we have seen continual improvement and moving up through the categorisation system. That school is now a green school, so they've been able to sustain their progress at the end of the programme. If we look at Armando in Eastern High School, againgosh, my goodness me, we had lots of debates in a previous Chamber about the future of Eastern. There was one person that said that Eastern had to be closed and that the only way forward for that particular school was for it to be shut down, but what we have seen is investment via Schools Challenge Cymru,but ongoing, continual support from the regional consortium, and that school has come out of special measures. I pay absolute tribute to the staff of that school and that community that have done such a good job. So, I'm absolutely convinced that where we've got goodleadership and good support,some of those schools are making continued, sustained progress even after the end of the programme. The challenge for me is for those schools that Schools Challenge Cymru didn't work for, and we haven't seen that progresshow we can use our school improvement system now to continue to work with those schools to give them the level of support that they need to make a difference. So that's what my focus is on now: a whole-system approach, rather than choosing 39 schools to get that level of support, when we recognise that there are schools everywhere, potentially, that need intervention, support and challenge, and in the primary sector as well. So, you wouldn't agree with a number ofwell, the near-unanimous evidence that we've had from academics, some of whom are Government advisers from consortia et cetera, that this kind of programme such as Schools Challenge Cymru would probably need about five years to really have the impact that it was intended to have. kirsty williams am: What I would say is that, from my understanding, from the outset, it was a time-limited programme. That's not to say it was the wrong decision, because what's important, and an ongoing legacy of the programme, was the investment in regional school improvement capacity, because at the time our school improvement services and the regions were young, in their infancy. The ability of individual local authorities to make a difference, with so many local authorities in an Estyn categorisation, was limited, so one of the ongoing legacies of the programme is that significant investment of over 10 million in the capacity of the regions to be able to continue this support and the school improvement work. llyr gruffydd am: So, how disappointed were you that the money for Schools Challenge Cymru went back into reserves and didn't stay in your envelope, as you described it earlier? I presume you made a pitch for it. Did you make a case for that money to stay within your department? kirsty williams am: Llyr, we are constantly having discussions with the Minister for Finance around support for the education budget. We were able to secure investment from the Finance Minister to be able to secure the programme and run it and phase it out to make sure there was transition support, so as we moved from the schools challenge programme into the regional consortia, there were resources to do that. llyr gruffydd am: Did you feel there was a case to be made to add to the consortia's resources and be able to continue that level of support that schools had previously had? kirsty williams am: Well, we did make resources available to the regional consortia to do that. As I say, from the outset, the previous Minister was very clear it was a time-limited programme. And I want to be absolutely clear: I have visited many, many Schools Challenge Cymru schools. I have used that opportunity to talk to them aboutHeolddu being one of them, Hefin, which we went to visit, and Willows, for instance. I'm going to one this afternoonI'm going to St Illtyd's this afternoon, and I always take. I always take the opportunity to speak to those teachers about their experience of the programme and to understand and assure myself that they are getting ongoing support that they see as an appropriate level for them. hefin david am: With regard to it being a time-limited programme, the previous Minister was clear that it was a time-limited programme, but it wasn't quite as time-limited as you've decided to be. Is that fair to say? kirsty williams am: No, it was supposed to be a three-year programme at the most. So, there's no differential between when I decided it was time-limited and the expectations hefin david am: So the time limit was the same that the previous Minister put on it. llyr gruffydd am: But Mel Ainscow did tell us that there was a fade out in that third yearnot that people were giving up, don't get me wrong, but clearly there wasn't that commitment coming from Government because the decision had been made, and people felt that it was just fizzling out a little bit, and that impacted on the momentum. I think there certainly was a transition phase when we knew that the programme was moving and schools were moving into a different level of support,but I certainly wouldn't describe it as a fading outnot at all. As I said, we were aware that the programme was transitioning and we were determined to get that right for those individual schools, and to learn the lessons and, crucially, to be able to apply those lessons right across the board. steve davies: I can see where the perception would come if a programme director like Mel was managing the programme right to the end of the three years exactly the same, and it falls offnot a cliff, but it falls off, then the readiness for schools and the readiness in the system to hand overso part of the shift of focus was that working as a Government with the programme in those schools to working with the programme, those schools and the region. So, I think, inevitably, one party might see it as a decrease in terms of emphasis on their work, but it was necessary for the transition. llyr gruffydd am: But does that cast a bit of a shadow over the transition, thenthat one key player within that process felt as such, or are you confident that that was managed well and effectively? kirsty williams am: I think it was managed well, and we were very clear to recognise success where success has been achieved, but not to gloss over where the programme had not made an impact, because that wouldn't be good for anybody. There was a formal event to close the programme, which gave everybody an opportunity to get together, to be formally thanked, and for, as I said, congratulations to be given to those people who had really made a differenceand, crucially, key staff transferred over into the regional consortia. So, for those individuals, they were able to continue their work, but just be able to apply that work on a regional basis rather than just in an individual school. So, I don't see that there was any fading out, but there was a transition into a new system, and many of those key personnel transitioned into the system with us. lynne neagle am: Have you got any figures for the numbers of staff who went from the programme into the consortia? kirsty williams am: Not off the top of my head, but I can let you know. kirsty williams am: And can I just say, I met with some of them? I met with a selection of those people who had been involved in the programme to get their feedback on what they felt had gone right, and what they didn't feel had gone right in the programme. So, I took the time not just to meet the figureheadof the programme, but actually to meet the people who were doing the work in the individual schools. darren millar am: Yes, I just wanted to ask you, you mentioned the figurehead there, I assume by 'the figurehead' you mean Professor Ainscow. And you've mentioned as well that you said you wanted to learn lessons from Schools Challenge Cymru, but he told us that nobody had been in touch with him since March of last year in order to have any sort of follow-up engagement, or to have a dialogue about his perspective on what worked, what didn't work, why there were failures in some areas and why there were successes in others. Why haven't you sought that level of engagement with the person who was responsible for running the programme? kirsty williams am: I've had that conversation with Mr Ainscow. We've spoken to the people who were actually involved in running the programme on a daily basis in individual schools. We've spoken to a wide variety of people to get their insight into the lessons learned, what was valuable and what was not valuable. darren millar am: But you've hardly engaged with Mr Ainscowwith Professor Ainscow himself. steve davies: I would actually say that I have had meetings darren millar am: Since March of last year. I've had discussions with Mel Ainscow, and my line manager at the time, Owen Evans, also had meetings and discussions. darren millar am: So, when he told us, 'Since last March, I literally have had no contact at all with anybody from Welsh Government', he was telling porky pies, was he? steve davies: That's not my recollection. kirsty williams am: Yes, well, I just talked about the celebration event to formally mark the end of the programme. And this idea that somebody has been ignored or frozen out is not how I see or how I regard that situation. mark reckless am: I have to say, with Professor Ainscow my impression was he took great, great pride in the work that he'd done with Schools Challenge Cymru, and I think he really enjoyed the engagement, the work and the positive relations with the Welsh Government. But I think there was just a degree of disappointment, perhaps, that at least he didn't feel that he'd been interrogated as much as he might have been about the lessons learned from the programme, and how perhaps to entrench those as well as possible with the regional consortia.I just wonder,Cabinet Secretary, if you could invite the professor in, perhaps to have a further debrief with you and take account of some of his thoughts and suggestions for what might help in this area. kirsty williams am: Well, Mark, as I said, I just don't think it should be right to characterise this as a failure to engage with a single individual. kirsty williams am: As I said, I met with him, Steve has met with him,Owen Evanshas met with him, my special policy adviser has met with him and had discussions. But, Mark, I hope that I have demonstrated since I took on this job that I am willing to work with a wide variety of people and to tap into their expertise if it can help me to deliver on the national mission. And if the advice to me is that we haven't sufficiently learnt the lessons, then I'll gladly have another conversation. What I'm saying to youand I'm absolutely confidentis that wehave learnt the lessons, we are taking that work and the good practice forward, and we have done that with conversations with a wide variety of people who had a view on this, from individual schools that were involved in the programme, individual people who were working in those schools, local education authorities, some of which have been very scathing about the programme, I should say, regional consortia. mark reckless am: I'm glad to hear that, Cabinet Secretary, but I still say that, listening to Professor Ainscow's evidence, there was a perception, at least from himindividually, that the programme should not be seen to be a failure, but adesire that the lessons should be learnt and a feeling or exception, at least on his part, that there was more that he still had to contribute to the process. And just to take one particular example, I think he referred to the Schools Challenge Cymru advisersbeing very successful in bringing in people who might not otherwise have contributed to this, and the regional consortia have had greater challenges in recruiting people, perhaps in some areas, of the same high standard of some particular individuals, but also from a wide range of different areas that the Schools Challenge Cymru do, and that there could be more to learn in that area as to how to support real excellence and a greater diversity of recruitment for those people. Is that something you could perhaps draw on his thoughts further about?Because I think he does feel that he has more to say to Welsh Government to help in this area. kirsty williams am: Firstly, can I say that I have never described the programme as a failure? I would understand, as someone who has put so much personal investment into the brand of schools challenges, that he would not want anybody to characterise that particular approach to school improvement as a failure. And I want to be absolutely clear that I have never described the programme as a failure, and I want to reassure Mr Ainscow of that. As I've said, gosh, my goodness me, if you saw my e-mail inbox and you saw the letters that come in, people are never shyin coming forward to give me advice on what I need to do, what I need to do next, what I'm doing right, what I'm doing wrong, and, you know, our doors are always open to listen to people who have interesting things to say about how we can deliver our educational mission. I'm sure the Minister is aware that Cardiff put extra funds of its own in to continue Schools Challenge Cymru advisers. So, obviously, they appreciated the value of the scheme, but it does query whether it should have gone on longer. kirsty williams am: Julie, I think, to be fair, there are some people who think the scheme was absolutely fantastic. I've had feedback from people who didn't think the scheme was helpful at allin fact, they felt it was a hindrance. I'm very much of the view that the scheme worked really well for some schools in some areas and had less impactin some areas. What's important to me is that we understand what it was that led those schools to make those big changes, how we canlike Mark talked about,the expertisehow we can keep that expertise in the system, and how we can applythe lessons to all schools. john griffiths am: Some questions on regional consortia, Cabinet Secretary, and, first of all, the role that you believe they should play and how schools use PDG. It's one of the things that I have been very clear to the regional consortia that I expect their challenge and support advisers to be asking schools about. So, one of the conversations that they need to have when they are in schools is exploring, with that school, how they are using their PDG, and how they're demonstrating an impact for those resources. So, it's a fundamental role for the challenge and support advisers in the regional consortia in their school improvement work. john griffiths am: That sort of brings to mind some of the research that's been done on the role of the challenge advisers, Cabinet Secretary, which suggested that they're not actually challenging schools in that way, and that there's very little evidence of schools changing their decisions on the use of PDG as a result of any challenge from those challenge advisers. So, how would you respond to those findings? kirsty williams am: Well, as I said, in my scrutiny of the role and success of our regional consortia, I specifically asked them about free-school-meal performance and the use of PDG within their particular region. I think there is increasing evidence to suggest that good use is being made of that resource, and I think that is being fed back into us. Estyn tell us that it's one of the areas of school expenditure that is closely linked to research and an evidence base. But, clearly, there is more to do, and that's why we have appointed the new regional advisers for PDG going forward, because we think there can be improvements in how this agenda can be supported at a regional level. There's always more that we can do, and we are strengthening that role by the appointment of the new regional PDG advisers, so that individualschool challenge advisers know what they should be looking for, know what they should be doing, and there is a regional approach to good practice. Could you tell the committee, Cabinet Secretary, how effective you believe the relationship was between the Schools Challenge Cymru programme and the regional consortia's school improvement functions, and to what extent it varied by region? kirsty williams am: I think it's fair to say that, on occasion, I have received feedback that there was a conflict between what was going on at an individual school under the school improvement programme and whether, then, they welcomed support from the regional consortia as part of that. So, in some cases, if we're being absolutely honest, there could sometimes be tensions between the two, but in most cases, the relationship was very, very positive and there was continuous feedback between the work going on in the schools under the programme and the regional consortia challenge advisers. But I'm going to be blunt and honest with peoplein some cases, it has been reported to meit's only anecdotal evidence; I haven't got hard and fast evidencethat there sometimes was a conflict: 'We're a school challenge school so we don't need to participate or listen to any advice that's coming from the regional consortia.' Or, a local education authority said to me, 'We felt that we couldn't get involved in that school anymore because it was part of a different programme.' Those were isolated incidents, and, as I said, it's only anecdotal feedback. steve davies: Just very quickly, I think that, across the board, it was more complex in the beginning, getting[Inaudible.]. But when the programme itself recognised that they needed to work with the regions, and the regions needed to work with themand I think Mel Ainscow in his evidence referred to thisit strengthened after some early challenges. I think Mel Ainscow was working in a number of regionsI can't remember which onesso he's established relationships[Interruption.] Sorry? kirsty williams am: Central south. He has already been working in that, so I think it possibly had a stronger springboard in terms of the early working. kirsty williams am: Because he already had relationships that he had already developed in that particular region. Finally from me, Cabinet Secretary: in 2015-16, Estyn reported on regional consortia not sufficiently focusing on particular groups of pupils and tracking their outcomesfor example, vulnerable pupils. I just wonder what you are able to tell us in terms of to what extent there has been necessary progress since 2015-16. Well, I think it's important to recognise that all four consortia underwentmonitoring visits in the autumn of last year, of 2017, which weren't reflected in the Estyn annual report for 2015-16. Estyn, through these 2017 inspections, have said that three out of the four regional consortia are making strong progress in their particular work, and we are continuing, as Welsh Government, to work with the other regional consortia to address the findings of the Estyn report. The committee probably hasn't had an opportunity to see, but, only this morning, Estyn has released a report on more able and talented, and has positive things to say in the field of more able and talented, which was being asked about earlier by Membersyou know, evidence of improved working and support in that particular arena. But, again, we need to ensure a consistency across all the regions, and that the findings of Estyn's most recent reports into regional performance are followed through. As we've got a couple of minutes left, if I can just jump back to the issue of practical uses of the PDGbecause it's the only thing we haven't really covered and it would be good to get on the recordcan I ask to what extent you'd like to see the PDG used to track the progress of eligible pupils? And the committee's heard that there are several different tracking systems and tools used by schools. To what extent is that an issue to do with what the Welsh Government is promoting? Or is it down to consortia or individual schools? And do you think there needs to be a more centralised push on how the tracking is undertaken? kirsty williams am: Firstly, can I say it's absolutely crucial that we track performance, absolutely crucial? That's the bedrock. We don't dictate to individual schools the nature of the system that they should employ in their school. There are a number of different programmes that allow schools to do this, but we are absolutely clear, and best practice and evidence shows us, that individual pupil tracking is key and crucial. And, as I said in the beginning, where we weren't tracking pupils at all, initial investment in PDG was used to establish these systems within schools. Again, one of the outcomes from the schools challenge review, and one of the lessons learnt, was, again, the importance of individual tracking of pupils throughout their school career. lynne neagle am: Okay, and you don't think there's more scope to look at what the best system is that can be recommended to schools. At the moment we use the Sutton Trust toolkit, which is fine and excellent, but we are having active discussions about whether we're in a position, now, to look at developing a suite of a Welsh toolkit to support this agenda, and that's under active consideration. Can I thank the Cabinet Secretary and the officials for attending and for answering such a wide range of questions? As usual, you'll be sent a transcript to check for accuracy following the meeting, but thank you again for coming. Paper to note 2 is a letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Education, updating us on the supply teacher issue. Paper to note 3another letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Education, providing further information following our meeting on 15 February. And paper to note 6 is a letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Education to the Children's Commissioner for Wales, following up on the dialogue that they've been having about our inquiry. Item 4, then, is for me to propose, in accordance with Standing Order 17.42, that the committee resolves to meet in private for the remainder of the meeting
